ABDALAZIZ ALHAMZA (Arabic: عبدالعزيز الحمزة) (sometimes Aziz Alhamza, Abdul Aziz Al-Hamza, Abdel Aziz al-Hamza; born in Raqqa, 1991),an award-winning Syrian journalist, human rights defender activist and IT trainer.[1][2] Alhamza is an International Security Program fellow at New America (organization), he is also a fellow and Next Generation Leader at the McCain Institute.,[3][4] He is the founder and spokesperson of Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently (RBSS) which is a nonpartisan, independent organization that exposes the atrocities committed by ISIS & other groups in Syria as well as the Syrian government. Alhamza started non-volatile protests and demonstrations against the Syrian government in 2011 and was arrested by the government three times in 2012. The Islamic State Group (ISIS) interrogated him more than one time about his activism. After ISIS took control of his hometown, Raqqa in January 2014, he escaped to Turkey and started Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently (RBSS) with his friends to show the reality of life in Raqqa and ISIS. In 2015, Alhamza received CPJ International Press Freedom Awards by the Committee to Protect Journalists and was named a Global Thinkers by Foreign Policy. In 2016, he has awarded the Ischia International Journalism Award , Civil Courage Prize and other awards on behalf of RBSS. Alhamza was featured in “City of Ghosts” a documentary that followed the Journey of Alhamza and his colleagues. Alhamza graduated with a degree in biochemistry from the faculty of science in Raqqa which is part of Al-Furat University. . He is the co-founder and spokesperson for Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently (RBSS) which is a non-partisan, independent organization that claims to expose the atrocities committed by the Syrian government or ISIS in Syria.[5][6][7]
