ABORTION IN TEXAS is legal. Access to abortion correlates to a number of other women's health rights issues, including  maternal death, insured pregnant women, infant and child deaths, teen drug and alcohol abuse, and cancer screening. 45% of adults said in a poll by the Pew Research Center that abortion should be legal in all or most cases. Abortion was illegal in the state by 1900, with a therapeutic exception in place by 1950.  In the early 2000s, the state passed a parental notification law.  In 2007, the state passed a mandatory ultrasound bill, and then started funding women's reproductive health programs that did not include abortion services and tried to cut off any state funding to facilities for reproductive services if they offered abortion services. Attempts to ban abortion in all cases were underway by 2007. By 2009, the legislature was actively trying to defund Planned Parenthood. Fetal heartbeat ban attempts were underway by 20013 when Phil King introduced such a bill on July 18, 2013, in the wake of Rick Perry signing Texas Senate Bill 5 into law. On February 7, 2019, Briscoe Cain, a member of the Texas House of Representatives, introduced a fetal heartbeat bill entitled the Texas Heartbeat Bill. It was jointly authored by Representatives Phil King, Dan Flynn, Tan Parker, and Rick Miller. As of February 26, 2019, HB 1500 had 57 sponsors or cosponsors of the 150 members of the Texas House of Representatives. Texas abortion laws have resulted in a number of cases that have gone before the Texas Supreme Court or the US Supreme Court.  They include 1973's _Roe v. Wade_ , 1975's _Jacobs v. Theimer_, and 2016's f _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_.
