The BHOVI is a word evolved from ‘vav’ meaning well in northern India and similarly bhavi in karunadu. They were professional well diggers since mideval times. This shows the route of their migration from northern parts India and then to southern part. The best example of this event was the story of jasmadevi and her husband who came to Gujarat for digging well on the call of a local ruler. It is said that they migrated from the state of Odisha hence they were called as vaddars, further the cites and many places are named after them like the Vadodara, vadnagar, etc. During course of their migration they picked local languages on their way, hence majority of them can speak Telugu in karunadu. They are a caste from the Indian state of Karnataka and are also call as _kallu vadaru_ which translates to people who work with stone and are master builders. Majority of the heritage sites in the regions of Karnataka may have been constructed by Bhovi's who were skilled workers . The Bhovi were 955,752 in Karnataka at the 2001 census (11.2 per cent of the scheduled caste population of Karnataka),[1] 74.9 per cent of the Karnataka Bhovi population was rural, 49.2% were literate.[2] Only 2.9% were graduates.[3] Bhovi's used to work as skilled labourers as they were good at construction and carving sculptures and they were highly respected in the Vijayanagara Empire.[4] Their village councils consists of experienced literate or illiterate people. [5] and Women are also given limited powers, however. [6] They claim to have originated in areas such as Odisha.[7] Bhovi also was the surname name of a male leader of a Bhovi community before the 21st century.[8] The language spoken by Bhovi is Kannada language.[9] They also claim to be the clan of _Bagirath Ganga_, who was responsible for bringing Ganges or Ganga to earth through manmade canals, hence claim to be the first builders of modern India.[10] They are distributed in almost all districts of Karnataka having a major concentration in parts of Gulbarga, Bhadravathi and Bangaluru.
