DR. BLASIO VINCENT ORIEDO, in full DR. BLASIO VINCENT NDALE ESAU ORIEDO (born September 15, 1931, Ebwali Village in Bunyore, Kenya Colony—died January 26, 1966, Aga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya) was a distinguished pioneering African epidemiologist and a parasitological scientist known for his contributions to tropical medicine and stemming a myriad of disease epidemics in the colonial era and embryonic postcolonial Kenya, and in the countries of the East and Central African region, and the Sudan.[1][2][3][4][5][6][7] He is especially credited for singlehandedly saving tens of thousands of native African lives from decimation due to an array of infectious diseases. His death in the springtime of life at age 34 was precipitously inexplicable, and has remained so to this day. Dr. Oriedo was a tripartite laureate; and a recipient of the coveted Extramural Medical Research Grant presented by the National Institute of Health (NIH), United States of America (U.S.A.). What is more, he was an academician, author, a linguist, and an East African statesman of his day. He was a close confidante of Thomas Joseph Odhiambo Mboya (d. 1969); and served as a member of Tom Mboya's interdisciplinary economic development advisory team from 1965 till his death in January 1966.[8][9][10][11] As a patron of the academics and intellectual infrastructures in East Africa, he is one of the unheralded silent forces behind the concept and impetus of the late 1950s - 1960s American academic scholarships for East African students; popularly dubbed the _Mboya-Kennedy_ “_Airlift to America_” program.[12][13] Moreover, he was renowned for his innate acumen to engender abidingly comprehensive polygonal interpersonal relationships with such international luminaries as _Sir Philip Edmund Clinton Manson-Bahr_ _(d. 1966)_ with whom he was close friends; and _Dr. Apollo Milton Obote_ _(d. 2005) twice president (1966–71, 1980–85) of Uganda_.
