The CHILD AND ADOLESCENT SYMPTOM INVENTORY (CASI) is a behavioral rating checklist created by Dr. Kenneth Gadow and Dr. Joyce Sprafkin that assesses a range of behaviors related to common emotional and behavior disorders identified in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM), including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, social phobia, separation anxiety disorder, major depressive episode, mania, dysthymic disorder (now pervasive depressive disorder in DSM-5), schizophrenia, autistic spectrum disorder, anorexia, and bulimia. In addition, one or two key symptoms of each of the following disorders are also included: obsessive-compulsive disorder, specific phobia, panic attack, motor tics, vocal tics, and substance use.[1] CASI combines the Child Symptom Inventory (CSI) and the Adolescent Symptom Inventory (ASI), letting it apply to both children and adolescents ages 5 to 18. The CASI is a self-report questionnaire completed by the child's caregiver or teacher to detect signs of psychiatric disorders in multiple settings. Compared to other widely used checklists for youths, the CASI maps more closely to DSM diagnoses, with scoring systems that map to the diagnostic criteria as well as providing a severity score. Other measures are more likely to have used statistical methods, such as factor analysis, to group symptoms that often occur together; if they have DSM-oriented scales, they are often later additions that only include some of the diagnostic criteria. It is not yet clear scientifically whether a statistical or DSM-oriented approach is more useful at a clinical level. The CASI provides a low burden way of gathering a lot of information quickly about common problems, helping the clinician and family decide where to focus attention during interviews and treatment.
