COLLEGELANDS is part of a £200m development project in the heart of Glasgow City. It is one of the largest regeneration projects in the United Kingdom. It was opened in 2012.The location which was the instituting place of the University of Glasgow takes up 1.1m square feet on the corner of Duke Street and High street. Collegelands, latterly known as the College Goods Railway Yard, is Glasgow's first new city centre quarter in years. The margin wall of the former College Goods Yard railway station on Duke Street has been reserved, in affirmation to the history of the site. The development has been created through a partnership between Glasgow City Council and Watkin Dawn Group.The city's economy was impacted by over £80million during the first phase of Collegelands, as over 400 construction jobs were created. It's also a quick subway ride to the University of Glasgow making it for students to access campuses. Shops, cafes and restaurants are just round the corner,the immediate environment is quiet and complemented by other student properties.[1] This development comprises 588 student study bedrooms including 565 en-suite bedrooms and 23 self-contained studio flats over nine storeys, with some ground floor retail units. Within the buildings footmark two courtyards were formed affording residents their own secure outdoor space whilst still maintaining privacy.[2] It is situated on Havannah Street, which is at the very centre of Glasgow. Collegelands is five minutes' walk from the University of Strathclyde,15 minutes from Glasgow Caledonian University and a few more to Glasgow School of Art. The building is about 10-minute walk to the Strathclyde university library which is handy for late night study sessions for students. Collegelands accommodates over 400 undergraduate and postgraduate university of Strathclyde students.[3] Besides being situated close to a prime locality and having a number of departmental stores at a stone's throw away, the Faculty Buildings of the University of Strathclyde are adjacent to Collegelands. The Graham Hills Building, Livingstone Tower and Thomas Graham Building are all easily accessible from the accommodation. All said and done, a famous quote that fits Collegelands description. It is a "Home away from Home". The facility is managed by Fresh Student Living which houses over 12,000 students in over 40 university and college locations across the UK.[4]
