JOSEPH (JOEY) DANIEL CAVACCINI (born September 21, 1999) is a community advocate and historian in the Town of Wappinger in the State of New York. Born and raised in Southern Dutchess County, starting at age 12 in 2012 was appointed to a special position created for him within the Office of the Town Historian for the Town of Wappinger,[1] making him the youngest person to be appointed to a post within a municipal historian's office. in New York State as well as the youngest official to serve in a public capacity in the State. He started his public career as a docent at the Van Wyck Homestead in Fishkill, New York and proceeded to get involved in other historical groups in Dutchess County at an early age. In 2014, he was appointed by the Board of Directors of the Sports Museum of Dutchess County to fill the vacancy of Museum Curator.[2] With this appointment Cavaccini started the largest renovation in the museum's history and spearheaded the Legends of Dutchess exhibition.[3] He is also the founder and Executive Director of the Friends of Carnwath Farms Historic Site & Park Incorporated,[4] a community based organization working with the Town of Wappinger to promote and preserve the town owned Carnwath Farms park. Cavaccini also serves a member of the Board of Trustees for the Wappinger Historical Society.[5] He is also involved in events and programming for the Town of Wappinger through his role on the Town Recreation Committee in which he was appointed to.[6] On January 4, 2017, Cavaccini was appointed to the position of Deputy Town Historian for the Town of Fishkill to Fishkill Town Historian Willa Skinner.[7] In June 2017, Skinner retired after serving 53 years in that capacity. Cavaccini, as Deputy Historian, was appointed to serve as acting Historian for the remainder of 2017. In 2018, Cavaccini was officially appointed Town of Fishkill Town Historian. [8] Joey_Cavaccini,_November_16,_2016,_DCHS_Awards_Ceremony.jpg On October 3, 2017, Cavaccini was elected to his first elected office representing the Grinnell Public Library District, which includes the Village of Wappingers Falls and Town of Wappinger. Assuming this office, made him the youngest elected official in the Town of Wappinger and the youngest at the time of taking office in New York State at 18 years old. Cavaccini was elected to a one-year term, coming in second behind candidate Daniel Lowney, who won the three-year seat. Cavaccini continues to serve the Town of Wappinger as the Town Historian and Aide to the Supervisor and the Town Board. On March 9, 2019, Cavaccini officially announced his candidacy for the Dutchess County Legislature's 15th District for the November 5, 2019 election.
