KOTESHWOR MAHADEVSTHAN () is one of the holy place of Kathmandu District in the Bagmati Zone. It is lies in Koteshwor, Kathmandu, Ward No. 32(previous 35) of Kathmandu Metropolitan City. This place is popularly known as Koteshwor Mahadevsthan and the Shiva lingam here is believed to have appeared divinely. But there are no written scriptures about the exact date of its appearance. This temple also has another name – Kotinath. According to a popular legend, the Shiva Lingam here is believed to be one of the 64 sacred Shiva Lingams. Bhagwati_mata.jpg The exact date when this temple was constructed remains unknown, the temple premises have stone inscription will help to find out the history of Koteshwor Mahadev but there were no any research have conducted. But myths point out that this place started being worshiped from the fifth century BC, though the concrete structures and pillars, as they now stand, were built much later. Near the Koteshwor Temple is a place known as Shankhamul. It is believed that Lord Shiva, while wandering in his boundless grief carrying Sati's body on his back, had rested his one-foot down on this place. And from the very land where Mahadev had tapped his foot sprang an incessant stream of water. It is said that in the Treta Yuga, Bhimsen – the brother of Ravan, the powerful king of Lanka – used to fetch water from Shankhamul, and carry it up to the Koteshwor Temple to offer it to Lord Shiva. Inside the temple periphery, there is also another Shiva Lingam, popular by the name of Khileshwar Mahadev.[1]
