THE SCHENCK HOUSE (built 1822) is one of the earliest extant homes currently within the City of Buffalo limits. It was built by early pioneer and farmer Michael Schenck[1] (1772–1844) and his son Samuel Schenck[2] (November 17, 1793 – December 1, 1872) out of locally quarried limestone, where many fossils can be seen on the eastern side of the facade. The Schenck family dates back to 1709 when they first arrived in America in an effort to escape religious persecution for being Anabaptist, specifically Mennonite. Just over a hundred years later they would find themselves in two covered wagons, traversing the Allegheny Mountains, and settling at the border between the City of Buffalo and Town of Amherst. There they practiced the same farming techniques they had in Pennsylvania and earlier in Germany. These techniques by today’s standards could be termed "environmentally friendly" and polyculture due to their use of crop rotation, production of multiple food products on a family farm, and the use of cow manure. The Schencks like other German settlers practiced the keeping and feeding of multiple types of animals, housing them in a barn through winter. This practice was considered unusual by farmers of British heritage. While the German idea of feeding and housing animals through winter was adopted by non-German farmers in the 19th century, the keeping of a variety of animals was not. Many 19th-century farmers began to develop specialized farms, unofficially becoming a "pig farmer" or "cattle rancher". Three generations of Schencks continued practicing polyculture of crops and animals even when monoculture continued to expand and “special” or synthetic fertilizers were being developed and used.
