A_Elbereth_Gilthoniel-teng.svg SINDARIN is a fictional language devised by J. R. R. Tolkien for use in his fantasy stories set in Arda (popularly called Middle-earth). Sindarin is one of the many languages spoken by the immortal Elves, called the _Eledhrim_ or _Edhellim_ in Sindarin. The word _Sindarin_ is itself a Quenya form. The only known Sindarin word for this language is _EGLATHRIN_, a word probably only used in the First Age (see Eglath).

Called in English "Grey-elvish" or "Grey-elven", it was the language of the Sindarin Elves of Beleriand. These were Elves of the Third Clan who remained behind in Beleriand after the Great Journey. Their language became estranged from that of their kin who sailed over sea. Sindarin derives from an earlier language called Common Telerin, which evolved from Common Eldarin, the tongue of the Eldar before their divisions, e.g., those Elves who decided to follow the Vala Oromë and undertook the Great March to Valinor. Even before that the Eldar Elves spoke the original speech of all Elves, or Primitive Quendian.

In the Third Age (the setting of _The Lord of the Rings_), Sindarin was the language most commonly spoken by most Elves in the Western part of Middle-earth. Sindarin is the language usually referred to as _the elf-tongue_ or _elven-tongue_ in _The Lord of the Rings_. When the Quenya-speaking Noldor returned to Middle-earth, they adopted the Sindarin language. Quenya and Sindarin were related, with many cognate words but differing greatly in grammar and structure. Sindarin is said to be more changeful than Quenya, and there were during the First Age a number of regional dialects. _FIND OUT MORE..._