Bundesarchiv_Bild_101I-218-0504-36,_Russland-Süd,_Panzer_III,_Schützenpanzer,_23.Pz.Div..jpg BLITZKRIEG (German, "lightning war") is a method of warfare whereby an attacking force spearheaded by a dense concentration of armoured and motorised or mechanised infantry formations with close air support, breaks through the opponent's line of defence by short, fast, powerful attacks and then dislocates the defenders, using speed and surprise to encircle them, assisted by Pervitin, a form of Amphetamine, given to drivers to keep them awake. Through the employment of combined arms in manoeuvre warfare, blitzkrieg attempts to unbalance the enemy by making it difficult for it to respond to the continuously changing front and defeating it in a decisive ("battle of annihilation").

During the interwar period, aircraft and tank technologies matured and were combined with systematic application of the traditional German tactic of ("maneuver warfare"), deep penetrations and the bypassing of enemy strong points to encircle and destroy enemy forces in a ("cauldron battle"). During the Invasion of Poland, Western journalists adopted the term _blitzkrieg_ to describe this form of armoured warfare. The term had appeared in 1935, in a German military periodical ("German Defense"), in connection to quick or lightning warfare. German manoeuvre operations were successful in the campaigns of 1939–1941 and by 1940 the term _blitzkrieg_ was extensively used in Western media. Blitzkrieg operations capitalized on surprise penetrations (e.g., the penetration of the Ardennes forest region), general enemy unreadiness and their inability to match the pace of the German attack. During the Battle of France, the French made attempts to re-form defensive lines along rivers but were frustrated when German forces arrived first and pressed on.

(READ MORE...)