Compton_Mackenzie.jpg

SIR COMPTON MACKENZIE, OBE (; 1883–1972) was a prolific writer of fiction, biography, histories, and memoir, as well as a cultural commentator, raconteur, and lifelong Scottish nationalist. He was one of the co-founders in 1928 of the Scottish National Party along with Hugh MacDiarmid, RB Cunninghame Graham and John MacCormick. Compton Mackenzie was born in West Hartlepool, England, into a theatrical family of Mackenzies, but many of whose members used COMPTON as their stage surname, starting with his grandfather Henry Compton, a well-known Shakespearean actor of the Victorian era. His father, Edward Compton, was an actor and theatre company manager; his sister, Fay Compton, starred in many of J. M. Barrie's plays, including _Peter Pan_. He was educated at St Paul's School and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he graduated with a degree in modern history.

Sir Compton Mackenzie is perhaps best known for two comedies set in Scotland, the Hebridean _Whisky Galore_ (1947) and the Highland _The Monarch of the Glen_ (1941), sources of a successful film and a television series respectively. He published almost a hundred books on different subjects, including ten volumes of autobiography, _My Life and Times_ (1963–1971). He also wrote history (on Marathon and Salamis), biography (_Mr Roosevelt_, 1943, a biography of FDR), literary criticism, satires, apologia (_Sublime Tobacco_ 1957), children's stories, poetry, and so on. Of his fiction, _The Four Winds of Love_ is sometimes considered to be his _magnum opus_. It is described by Dr. John MacInnes (formerly of the School of Scottish Studies) as "one of the greatest works of English literature produced in the twentieth century."