0}} (where this 0 is the additive identity of the ring). Important examples are finite fields.

1 is the first figurate number of every kind, such as triangular number, pentagonal number and centered hexagonal number, to name just a few.

In many mathematical and engineering problems, numeric values are typically _normalized_ to fall within the unit interval from 0 to 1, where 1 usually represents the maximum possible value in the range of parameters. Likewise, vectors are often normalized to give unit vectors, that is vectors of magnitude one, because these often have more desirable properties. Functions, too, are often normalized by the condition that they have integral one, maximum value one, or square integral one, depending on the application.

Because of the multiplicative identity, if _f_(_x_) is a multiplicative function, then _f_(1) must equal 1.

It is also the first and second number in the Fibonacci sequence (0 is the zeroth) and is the first number in many other mathematical sequences.

1 is neither a prime number nor a composite number, but a unit (meaning of ring theory), like −1 and, in the Gaussian integers, _i_ and −_i_. The fundamental theorem of arithmetic guarantees unique factorization over the integers only up to units. (For example, 2}}, but if units are included, is also equal to, say, among infinitely many similar "factorizations".)

The definition of a field requires that 1 must not be equal to 0. Thus, there are no fields of characteristic 1. Nevertheless, abstract algebra can consider the field with one element, which is not a singleton and is not a set at all.

1 is the only positive integer divisible by exactly one positive integer (whereas prime numbers are divisible by exactly two positive integers, composite numbers are divisible by more than two positive integers, and zero is divisible by all positive integers). 1 was formerly considered prime by some mathematicians, using the definition that a prime is divisible only by 1 and itself. However, this complicates the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, so modern definitions exclude units.

By definition, 1 is the magnitude, absolute value, or norm of a unit complex number, unit vector, and a unit matrix (more usually called an identity matrix). Note that the term _unit matrix_ is sometimes used to mean something quite different.

By definition, 1 is the probability of an event that is almost certain to occur.

1 is the most common leading digit in many sets of data, a consequence of Benford's law.

1 is the only known Tamagawa number for a simply connected algebraic group over a number field.

The generating function that has all coefficients 1 is given by

$\frac{1}{1-x} = 1+x+x^2+x^3+ \ldots$

This power series converges and has finite value if and only if, |x| < 1.

In category theory, 1 is sometimes used to denote the terminal object of a category.

In number theory, 1 is the value of Legendre's constant, which was introduced in 1808 by Adrien-Marie Legendre in expressing the asymptotic behavior of the prime-counting function. Legendre's constant was originally conjectured to be approximately 1.08366, but was proven to equal exactly 1 in 1899.

Table of basic calculations

  Multiplication   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20      21   22   23   24   25      50   100   1000
  ---------------- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---- -- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- -- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- -- ---- ----- ------
  1 × _X_          1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20      21   22   23   24   25      50   100   1000

  Division   1   2     3    4      5     6     7    8       9    10       11   12     13   14    15
  ---------- --- ----- ---- ------ ----- ----- ---- ------- ---- ----- -- ---- ------ ---- ----- -----
  1 ÷ _X_    1   0.5   0.   0.25   0.2   0.1   0.   0.125   0.   0.1      0.   0.08   0.   0.0   0.0
  _X_ ÷ 1    1   2     3    4      5     6     7    8       9    10       11   12     13   14    15

  Exponentiation   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20
  ---------------- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---- -- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  1                1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1       1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1
  _X_              1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20


In technology

U+2673_DejaVu_Sans.svg

-   The resin identification code used in recycling to identify polyethylene terephthalate.[1]
-   The ITU country code for the North American Numbering Plan area, which includes the United States, Canada, and parts of the Caribbean
-   A binary code is a sequence of 1 and 0 that is used in computers for representing any kind of data.
-   In many physical devices, 1 represents the value for "on", which means that electricity is flowing.[2][3]
-   The numerical value of true in many programming languages.
-   1 is the ASCII code of "Start of Header".


In science

-   Dimensionless quantities are also known as quantities of dimension one.
-   1 is the atomic number of hydrogen.
-   +1 is the electric charge of positrons and protons.
-   Group 1 of the periodic table consists of the alkali metals.
-   Period 1 of the periodic table consists of just two elements, hydrogen and helium.
-   The dwarf planet Ceres has the minor-planet designation 1 Ceres because it was the first asteroid to be discovered.
-   The Roman numeral I often stands for the first-discovered satellite of a planet or minor planet (such as Neptune I, a.k.a. Triton). For some earlier discoveries, the Roman numerals originally reflected the increasing distance from the primary instead.


In philosophy

In the philosophy of Plotinus and a number of other neoplatonists, The One is the ultimate reality and source of all existence. Philo of Alexandria (20 BC – AD 50) regarded the number one as God's number, and the basis for all numbers ("De Allegoriis Legum," ii.12 [i.66]).


In literature

-   Number One is a character in the book series Lorien Legacies by Pittacus Lore.
-   Number 1 is also a character in the series "Artemis Fowl" by Eoin Colfer.
-   In a 1968 song by Harry Nilsson and recorded by Three Dog Night, the number one is identified as "the loneliest number".
-   _We Are Number One_ is a 2014 song from the children's TV show LazyTown, which gained popularity as a meme.


In comics

-   A character in the Italian comic book Alan Ford (authors Max Bunker and Magnus), very old disabled man, the supreme leader of the group TNT.
-   A character in the Italian comic series PKNA and its sequels, an artificial intelligence as an ally of the protagonist Paperinik


In sports

-   In baseball scoring, the number 1 is assigned to the pitcher.
-   In association football (soccer) the number 1 is often given to the goalkeeper.
-   In most competitions of rugby league (though not the Super League, which uses static squad numbering), the starting fullback wears jersey number 1.
-   In rugby union, the starting loosehead prop wears the jersey number 1.
-   1 is the lowest number permitted for use by players of the National Hockey League (NHL); the league prohibited the use of 00 and 0 in the late 1990s. (The highest number permitted is 98.)
-   1 is the lowest number permitted for use at most levels of American football. Under National Football League policy, it can only be used by a quarterback or kicking player (during preseason play, restrictions are looser, and players of other positions can wear the number and can also, if no other options exist, wear 0).
-   In Formula One, the previous year's world champion is allowed to use the number 1.


In film

-   _One A.M._ (1916), starring Charlie Chaplin.
-   _One More Time_ (1970), directed by Jerry Lewis and starring Sammy Davis Jr. and Peter Lawford.
-   _One Day_ (2011), starring Anne Hathaway and Jim Sturgess.


In other fields

-   1 is the value of an ace in many playing card games, such as cribbage.
-   List of highways numbered 1
-   List of public transport routes numbered 1
-   1 is often used to denote the Gregorian calendar month of January.
-   1 CE, the first year of the Common Era
-   01, the former dialing code for Greater London
-   PRS One, a German paraglider design
-   +1 is the code for international telephone calls to countries in the North American Numbering Plan


See also

-   −1
-   +1 (disambiguation)
-   One (word)
-   Root of unity


References


External links

-   The Number 1
-   The Positive Integer 1
-   Prime curiosities: 1

1_(number) Category:Integers

[1]

[2]

[3]