_1000 AMPS_ is a 2012 action-adventure puzzle platform game developed by Brandon Brizzi.


Plot

There is a power outage in the Amp Tree System; Plug must navigate the darkness and repair the lights, one room at a time.


Gameplay

The player controls Plug as he makes his way through the various interconnected rooms of the Amp Tree System. He must illuminate all of the tiles in each room by walking over them. As he gradually lights up the room, he will be able to jump higher; this effect is temporary, as his jumping ability resets upon entering a new room. However, he will also obtain other, permanent upgrades to help him solve more complex puzzles, such as the ability to teleport.


Reception

_1000 Amps_ received mixed reviews. John Walker of _Rock Paper Shotgun_ recommended the game, saying, "I really want you to play this. It’s such a smart, enormous game, often enormously difficult, but get stuck and there are always another dozen rooms you can try."[1] Gamezebo also praised _1000 Amps_, calling it a "stylish, expansive game that relies on its attractive, high-contrast visuals, as well as the opportunities it gives the player for exploration", though said the game's mechanic of resetting rooms when exited "can sometimes be frustrating, as it’s easy to bounce out of a room unintentionally".[2] _PC Gamer_ gave it 64/100, calling it "[a]n often frustrating game built around a clever idea", and argued that the darkening of unsolved rooms makes "exploration [become] an exercise in feeling around in the dark, unsure if you're about to plunge down a hole into another room entirely, losing all your progress in the current room." On a positive note, it also said "[t]he core idea of powering up your character progressively is a solid one, and there are moments of real beauty in the stark-but-cute art style", though wrote the game was too flawed as a whole to take full advantage of these ideas.[3]


References


External links

-   _1000 Amps_ at GameFAQs

Category:2012 video games Category:Action-adventure games Category:MacOS games Category:Windows games Category:Metroidvania games Category:Platform games Category:Video games developed in the United States

[1]

[2]

[3]