The 2017 ST. LOUIS MAYORAL ELECTION was held on April 4, 2017, to elect the mayor of St. Louis, Missouri. Incumbent Mayor Francis Slay chose not to run for reelection. Slay, who was serving his fourth term as mayor, indicated in March 2016 that he would run for reelection,[1] but announced in April 2016 that he would not run for a fifth term.[2] Primary elections took place on March 7, 2017, and the general election was held on April 4. Alderwoman Lyda Krewson was elected and will serve as the first female Mayor of St. Louis.[3]


Democratic primary

Candidates

Declared

-   Jeffrey Boyd, Alderman[4]
-   Antonio French, Alderman[5]
-   Bill Haas, school board member[6]
-   Tishaura Jones, City Treasurer and former state representative[7][8]
-   Lyda Krewson, Alderwoman[9][10]
-   Jimmie Matthews[11]
-   Lewis Reed, president of the board of aldermen and candidate for mayor in 2013[12]

Withdrew

-   Sam Dotson, Commissioner of Police[13]
-   Jamilah Nasheed, state senator[14]

Declined

-   Gregory F.X. Daly, Collector of Revenue[15]
-   Francis Slay, incumbent mayor[16]

Polling

  Poll source                Date(s) administered   Sample size   Margin of error   Jeffrey Boyd   Antonio French   Bill Haas   Tishaura Jones   Lyda Krewson          Jimmie Matthews   Lewis Reed   Undecided
  -------------------------- ---------------------- ------------- ----------------- -------------- ---------------- ----------- ---------------- --------------------- ----------------- ------------ ---------------------
  Remington Research Group   February 14–15, 2017   1,006         ± 3%              4%             12%              3%          16%              align="center" |34%   1%                14%          align="center" |16%
  Remington Research Group   February 7–8, 2017     803           ± 3.43%           3%             14%              1%          13%              align="center" |36%   1%                15%          align="center" |16%
  Remington Research Group   January 24–25, 2017    917           ± 3.16%           5%             13%              2%          8%               align="center" |29%   2%                18%          align="center" |24%
  Remington Research Group   January 17–18, 2017    949           ± 3.16%           4%             13%              2%          9%               align="center" |27%   1%                18%          align="center" |26%


Republican primary

Candidates

Nominated

-   Andrew Jones, utility executive[17][18]

Declared

-   Andy Karandzieff, owner of Crown Candy Kitchen[19]
-   Jim Osher, building owner[20]


Libertarian primary

-   Robb Cunningham, former Congressional candidate[21]


Green primary

-   Jonathan McFarland, former U.S. Senate candidate[22]


Independent candidates

-   Tyrone Austin, small business owner[23]
-   Kacey Cordes[24]
-   Rev. Larry Rice, founder of the New Life Evangelistic Center[25]


Results

Results

|-bgcolor="#EEEEEE" | colspan="5" align="right" | TOTAL | align="right" | 58,303


References

Category:Mayoral elections in St. Louis St. Louis St. Louis Category:2010s in St. Louis St. Louis

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]