The 3.2-INCH GUN M1897 (81 mm), with its predecessors the M1885 and M1890, was the U.S. Army's first steel, rifled, breech loading field gun. It was the Army's primary field artillery piece in the Spanish–American War, Philippine–American War, and Boxer Rebellion from 1898 to 1902.[1]


Design

This series of weapons was designed to provide a modern alternative to breech loading conversions of the Civil War-era 3-inch Ordnance rifle. It was constructed of steel and was of built-up construction with a central rifled tube, and reinforcing hoops from the trunnions to the breech. Its steel was stronger than the wrought iron of preceding weapons. The guns had a de Bange style interrupted screw breech and fired separate-loading, bagged charges and projectiles. The projectiles weighed approximately and common, shrapnel, or canister types available.[2] The M1885 and M1890 used black powder when first introduced, but the M1897 was redesigned for smokeless powder; the M1890 weapons were then modified for smokeless powder and re-designated M1897s.[3][4] In the Spanish–American War, difficulties were encountered in ramping up production of smokeless powder, so the M1885 and M1890 weapons were deployed to use the available black powder.[5] The M1890 was a simplification of the M1885, with the barrel made from two forgings instead of eight.[6] The guns had a box trail carriage built from bolted steel plates with two large wooden spoked wheels. The guns did not have a recoil mechanism or a gun shield but the carriage's wheel brakes provided some recoil absorption. Due to its low angle of elevation +20° it was a direct fire weapon. For transport, the gun was attached to a limber for towing by a horse team and there were seats attached to the axle of the carriage for the crew. The limber also had seats for crew members plus ammunition and supplies.[7]


Service history

This weapon was the workhorse light artillery piece of the Spanish–American War and the Philippine–American War from 1898 to 1902. At least 16 were deployed to Cuba in the former conflict. It was also used in the China Relief Expedition in 1900.[8] Beginning in 1902 the 3.2-inch gun was largely replaced in combat units by the 3-inch M1902 field gun. However, 3.2-inch guns lingered in reserve and training roles. During World War I, the Army primarily used the French 75 mm gun instead of its own designs, which were mostly kept in the United States for training. The 3.2-inch guns were declared obsolete and almost all were scrapped beginning in 1919.[9]


Surviving examples

At least 38 of these weapons survive, six in private hands.[10]

-   Two M1898 at Fort Stevens State Park, Hammond, Oregon
-   One M1885 at Rock Island Arsenal, Illinois
-   One M1897 in Abilene, Texas
-   One M1885, Fairmount Cemetery, Denver, Colorado[11]
-   One M1885 at Memorial Triangle Park in Brookhaven, New York[12]
-   One M1897 in Burlington, Wisconsin[13]
-   One M1885 in Waterford, Wisconsin[14]
-   One M1897 in Veterans' Memorial Park, Hull, Massachusetts[15]
-   One M1890, Main Street, Flemington, New Jersey[16]
-   One M1897 in Montgomery, Illinois
-   Three M1897 at San Juan Hill, Santiago de Cuba, Cuba


See also

-   List of U.S. Army weapons by supply catalog designation SNL C-24
-   List of field guns


Gallery

File:Cannons being loaded on transport preparing to sail to Cuba for the Spanish-American war- Tampa, Florida (3465709198).jpg|3.2-inch guns being loaded at Tampa FL during the Spanish–American War. File:WHI.2014.65 (13967806952).jpg|3.2-inch guns of the 6th US Artillery in the Spanish–American War. File:Manila646 1899.jpg|3.2-inch guns in the Philippines.


References

-   -


External links

-   Description of the use of 3.2-inch guns in the Philippines, US War Department report for fiscal year ended June 30, 1900, pp. 357–359

Category:World War I artillery of the United States Category:Artillery of the United States Category:Field guns Category:81 mm artillery

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] Ordnance, p. 7

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11] 3.2-inch gun in Denver, CO at Waymarking.com

[12] PDF about 3.2-inch gun in Brookhaven, NY

[13] War memorials in Burlington, WI

[14] War memorials in Waterford, WI

[15] Artillery preserved in Massachusetts by Harold A. Skaarup

[16] Page on 3.2-inch gun in Flemington, NJ at Barking-Moonbat.com