927_MIXFM.png

92.7 MIX FM (call sign: 4SSS) is an Australian commercial radio station located on Queensland's Sunshine Coast, broadcasting as Mix FM.

The station can be received in the greater Sunshine Coast area on 92.7 FM. With an adult hits format, the station is targeted towards the older demographics in the listening area, leaving their sister station 91.9 Sea FM to attract the younger demographics with their contemporary hit radio format. Along with 91.9 Sea FM, 92.7 MiX FM is owned by EON Broadcasters.[1] Prior to 2013, Southern Cross Austereo owned the stations, but their sale was forced when the merger of Southern Cross Media Group with Austereo took place in 2011.[2]

Because of an overlap between the Sunshine Coast and Brisbane radio markets, the sale resulted in a breach of ACMA regulations, stating a media company cannot own more than two radio assets in the same market. The breach occurred as Austereo already owned B105 and Triple M in Brisbane, which meant the company owned four stations within the overlap and a sale of two stations was forced.[3] Southern Cross Austereo protested the decision by ACMA to force the sale of 92.7 MiX FM and 91.9 Sea FM, but the sale was eventually processed.[4]

Despite the sale, 92.7 MiX FM retains the look and sound of a Southern Cross Austereo Triple M LocalWorks station, due to the previous program supply arrangements remaining in place[5] allowing the station to continue broadcasting SCA-produced programs such as _The Night Shift With Luke Bona_,[6] _Saturday Night Party Shuffle_,[7] _Sunday Barbie_[8] and _Great Australian Doorstep_.[9]

In 2015, Mix FM won the first ratings survey undertaken in the Sunshine Coast radio market in ten years with an overall audience share of 19.2%.[10] The station performed best in the 40-54 demographic attracting 32.9% of audience share.[11]


References

Category:Radio stations in Queensland

[1] Coast radio stations sold to EON Broadcasters, Anthony Brand, _Sunshine Coast Daily_, 8 March 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2016.

[2] Media Release: SCA Confirms Sale of Sunshine Coast, Southern Cross Austereo website, 3 March 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2016.

[3] Sunshine Coast sale a sure thing, _radioinfo_, 17 October 2011. Retrieved 20 November 2016.

[4] Trapped in an overlap: Southern Cross Austereo takes on ACMA, _Crikey_, 25 October 2011. Retrieved 20 November 2016.

[5] 1Glenn Wheatley buys Sea FM & Mix FM, _Radio Today_, 7 March 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2016.

[6] _Talking Back The Night_: About The Show, 92.7 Mix FM website. Retrieved 23 January 2018.

[7] _Saturday Night Party Shuffle_, 92.7 Mix FM website. Retrieved 20 November 2016

[8] _Sunday Barbie_, 92.7 Mix FM website. Retrieved 20 November 2016.

[9] _Great Australian Doorstep_, 92.7 Mix FM website. Retrieved 20 November 2016

[10] 92.7 Mix FM tops first Sunshine Coast ratings in 10 years, _Sunshine Coast Daily_, 10 June 2015. Retrieved 20 November 2016.

[11] Sunshine Coast - Xtra Research - Survey 1: 2015, _Radio Today_, 10 June 2015. Retrieved 20 November 2016.