Abacı|the medieval book|Liber Abaci}} Boulier1.JPG'']]
Houghton_Typ_520.03.736_-_Margarita_philosophica.jpg: _Margarita
Philosophica_, 1503. The woodcut shows _Arithmetica_ instructing an
algorist and an abacist (inaccurately represented as Boethius and
Pythagoras). There was keen competition between the two from the
introduction of the _Algebra_ into Europe in the 12th century until its
triumph in the 16th.[1]]]

The ABACUS (_plural_ ABACI or ABACUSES), also called a COUNTING FRAME,
is a calculating tool that was in use in Europe, China and Russia,
centuries before the adoption of the written Hindu–Arabic numeral
system.[2] The exact origin of the abacus is still unknown. Today,
abacuses are often constructed as a bamboo frame with beads sliding on
wires, but originally they were beans or stones moved in grooves in sand
or on tablets of wood, stone, or metal.

Abacuses come in different designs. Some designs, like the bead frame
consisting of beads divided into tens, are used mainly to teach
arithmetic, although they remain popular in the post-Soviet states as a
tool. Other designs, such as the Japanese soroban, have been used for
practical calculations even involving several digits. For any particular
abacus design, there are usually numerous different methods to perform a
certain type of calculation, which may include basic operations like
addition and multiplication, or even more complex ones, such as
calculating square roots. Some of these methods may work with
non-natural numbers (numbers such as and ).

Although today many use calculators and computers instead of abacuses to
calculate, abacuses still remain in common use in some countries.
Merchants, traders and clerks in some parts of Eastern Europe, Russia,
China and Africa use abacuses, and they are still used to teach
arithmetic to children.[3] Some people who are unable to use a
calculator because of visual impairment may use an abacus.


Etymology

The use of the word _abacus_ dates before 1387 AD, when a Middle English
work borrowed the word from Latin to describe a sandboard abacus. The
Latin word came from Greek _abax_ which means something without base,
and improperly, any piece of rectangular board or plank.[4][5][6]
Alternatively, without reference to ancient texts on etymology, it has
been suggested that it means "a square tablet strewn with dust",[7] or
"drawing-board covered with dust (for the use of mathematics)"[8] (the
exact shape of the Latin perhaps reflects the genitive form of the Greek
word, _abakos_). Whereas the table strewn with dust definition is
popular, there are those that do not place credence in this at all and
in fact state that it is not proven.[9] Greek itself is probably a
borrowing of a Northwest Semitic, perhaps Phoenician, word akin to
Hebrew _ʾābāq_ (), "dust" (or in post-Biblical sense meaning "sand used
as a writing surface").[10]

The preferred plural of _abacus_ is a subject of disagreement, with both
_abacuses_[11] and _abaci_[12] (hard "c") in use. The user of an abacus
is called an _abacist_.[13]


History

Mesopotamian

The period 2700–2300 BC saw the first appearance of the Sumerian abacus,
a table of successive columns which delimited the successive orders of
magnitude of their sexagesimal number system.[14]

Some scholars point to a character from the Babylonian cuneiform which
may have been derived from a representation of the abacus.[15] It is the
belief of Old Babylonian[16] scholars such as Carruccio that Old
Babylonians "may have used the abacus for the operations of addition and
subtraction; however, this primitive device proved difficult to use for
more complex calculations".[17]

Egyptian

The use of the abacus in Ancient Egypt is mentioned by the Greek
historian Herodotus, who writes that the Egyptians manipulated the
pebbles from right to left, opposite in direction to the Greek
left-to-right method. Archaeologists have found ancient disks of various
sizes that are thought to have been used as counters. However, wall
depictions of this instrument have not been discovered.[18]

Persian

During the Achaemenid Empire, around 600 BC the Persians first began to
use the abacus.[19] Under the Parthian, Sassanian and Iranian empires,
scholars concentrated on exchanging knowledge and inventions with the
countries around them – India, China, and the Roman Empire, when it is
thought to have been exported to other countries.

Greek

Salaminische_Tafel_Salamis_Tablet_nach_Wilhelm_Kubitschek_Numismatische_Zeitschrift_Bd_31_Wien_1899_p._394_ff.jpg
The earliest archaeological evidence for the use of the Greek abacus
dates to the 5th century BC.[20] Also Demosthenes (384 BC–322 BC) talked
of the need to use pebbles for calculations too difficult for your
head.[21][22] A play by Alexis from the 4th century BC mentions an
abacus and pebbles for accounting, and both Diogenes and Polybius
mention men that sometimes stood for more and sometimes for less, like
the pebbles on an abacus.[23] The Greek abacus was a table of wood or
marble, pre-set with small counters in wood or metal for mathematical
calculations. This Greek abacus saw use in Achaemenid Persia, the
Etruscan civilization, Ancient Rome and, until the French Revolution,
the Western Christian world.

A tablet found on the Greek island Salamis in 1846 AD (the Salamis
Tablet), dates back to 300 BC, making it the oldest counting board
discovered so far. It is a slab of white marble long, wide, and thick,
on which are 5 groups of markings. In the center of the tablet is a set
of 5 parallel lines equally divided by a vertical line, capped with a
semicircle at the intersection of the bottom-most horizontal line and
the single vertical line. Below these lines is a wide space with a
horizontal crack dividing it. Below this crack is another group of
eleven parallel lines, again divided into two sections by a line
perpendicular to them, but with the semicircle at the top of the
intersection; the third, sixth and ninth of these lines are marked with
a cross where they intersect with the vertical line.[24] Also from this
time frame the _Darius Vase_ was unearthed in 1851. It was covered with
pictures including a "treasurer" holding a wax tablet in one hand while
manipulating counters on a table with the other.[25]

Chinese

abacus_6.png'') (the number represented in the picture is
6,302,715,408)]] The earliest known written documentation of the Chinese
abacus dates to the 2nd century BC.[26]

The Chinese abacus, known as the _suanpan_ (算盤, lit. "calculating
tray"), is typically tall and comes in various widths depending on the
operator. It usually has more than seven rods. There are two beads on
each rod in the upper deck and five beads each in the bottom. The beads
are usually rounded and made of a hardwood. The beads are counted by
moving them up or down towards the beam; beads moved toward the beam are
counted, while those moved away from it are not.[27] The _suanpan_ can
be reset to the starting position instantly by a quick movement along
the horizontal axis to spin all the beads away from the horizontal beam
at the center.

The prototype of the Chinese abacus appeared during the Han Dynasty, and
the beads are oval. The Song Dynasty and earlier used the 1:4 type or
four-beads abacus similar to the modern abacus commonly known as
Japanese-style abacus.

In the early Ming Dynasty, the abacus began to appear in the form of 1:5
abacus. The upper deck had one bead and the bottom had five beads.

In the late Ming Dynasty, the abacus styles appeared in the form of 2:5.
The upper deck had two beads, and the bottom had five beads. It can
express hexadecimal or smaller bases, because the calculation method at
that time included the Chinese catty equal to sixteen
tael（一斤十六兩）.

Various calculation techniques were devised for _Suanpan_ enabling
efficient calculations. There are currently schools teaching students
how to use it.

In the long scroll _Along the River During the Qingming Festival_
painted by Zhang Zeduan during the Song dynasty (960–1297), a _suanpan_
is clearly visible beside an account book and doctor's prescriptions on
the counter of an apothecary's (Feibao).

The similarity of the Roman abacus to the Chinese one suggests that one
could have inspired the other, as there is some evidence of a trade
relationship between the Roman Empire and China. However, no direct
connection can be demonstrated, and the similarity of the abacuses may
be coincidental, both ultimately arising from counting with five fingers
per hand. Where the Roman model (like most modern Korean and Japanese)
has 4 plus 1 bead per decimal place, the standard _suanpan_ has 5 plus
2. (Incidentally, this allows use with a hexadecimal numeral system,
which was used for traditional Chinese measures of weight.) Instead of
running on wires as in the Chinese, Korean, and Japanese models, the
beads of Roman model run in grooves, presumably making arithmetic
calculations much slower.

Another possible source of the _suanpan_ is Chinese counting rods, which
operated with a decimal system but lacked the concept of zero as a place
holder. The zero was probably introduced to the Chinese in the Tang
dynasty (618–907) when travel in the Indian Ocean and the Middle East
would have provided direct contact with India, allowing them to acquire
the concept of zero and the decimal point from Indian merchants and
mathematicians.

Roman

RomanAbacusRecon.jpg]] The normal method of calculation in ancient Rome,
as in Greece, was by moving counters on a smooth table. Originally
pebbles (_calculi_) were used. Later, and in medieval Europe, jetons
were manufactured. Marked lines indicated units, fives, tens etc. as in
the Roman numeral system. This system of 'counter casting' continued
into the late Roman empire and in medieval Europe, and persisted in
limited use into the nineteenth century.[28] Due to Pope Sylvester II's
reintroduction of the abacus with modifications, it became widely used
in Europe once again during the 11th century[29][30] This abacus used
beads on wires, unlike the traditional Roman counting boards, which
meant the abacus could be used much faster.[31]

Writing in the 1st century BC, Horace refers to the wax abacus, a board
covered with a thin layer of black wax on which columns and figures were
inscribed using a stylus.[32]

One example of archaeological evidence of the Roman abacus, shown here
in reconstruction, dates to the 1st century AD. It has eight long
grooves containing up to five beads in each and eight shorter grooves
having either one or no beads in each. The groove marked I indicates
units, X tens, and so on up to millions. The beads in the shorter
grooves denote fives –five units, five tens etc., essentially in a
bi-quinary coded decimal system, related to the Roman numerals. The
short grooves on the right may have been used for marking Roman "ounces"
(i.e. fractions).

Indian

The decimal number system invented in India replaced the abacus in
Western Europe.[33]

The _Abhidharmakośabhāṣya_ of Vasubandhu (316-396), a Sanskrit work on
Buddhist philosophy, says that the second-century CE philosopher
Vasumitra said that "placing a wick (Sanskrit _vartikā_) on the number
one (_ekāṅka_) means it is a one, while placing the wick on the number
hundred means it is called a hundred, and on the number one thousand
means it is a thousand". It is unclear exactly what this arrangement may
have been. Around the 5th century, Indian clerks were already finding
new ways of recording the contents of the Abacus.[34] Hindu texts used
the term _śūnya_ (zero) to indicate the empty column on the abacus.[35]

Japanese

Soroban.JPG]] In Japanese, the abacus is called _soroban_ (, lit.
"Counting tray"), imported from China in the 14th century.[36] It was
probably in use by the working class a century or more before the ruling
class started, as the class structure did not allow for devices used by
the lower class to be adopted or used by the ruling class.[37] The 1/4
abacus, which is suited to decimal calculation popular appeared circa
1930, and became widespread as the Japanese abandoned hexadecimal weight
calculation which was still common in China.

Today's Japanese abacus is a 1:4 type, four-bead abacus was introduced
from China in the Muromachi era. It adopts the form of the upper deck
one bead and the bottom four beads. The top bead on the upper deck was
equal to five and the bottom one is equal to one like the Chinese or
Korean abacus, and the decimal number can be expressed, so the abacus is
designed as one four abacus. The beads are always in the shape of a
diamond. The quotient division is generally used instead of the division
method; at the same time, in order to make the multiplication and
division digits consistently use the division multiplication. Later,
Japan had a 3:5 abacus called天三算盤, which is now the Ize Rongji
collection of Shansi Village in Yamagata City. There were also had 2:5
beads abacus. With the four-bead abacus spread, it is also common to use
Japanese abacus around the world. There are also improved Japanese
abacus in various places. One of the Japanese-made abacus made in China
is an aluminum frame plastic bead abacus. The file is next to the four
beads, and the "clearing" button, press the clearing button, immediately
put the upper bead to the upper position, the lower bead is dialed to
the lower position, immediately clearing, easy to use.

The abacus is still manufactured in Japan today even with the
proliferation, practicality, and affordability of pocket electronic
calculators. The use of the soroban is still taught in Japanese primary
schools as part of mathematics, primarily as an aid to faster mental
calculation. Using visual imagery of a soroban, one can arrive at the
answer in the same time as, or even faster than, is possible with a
physical instrument.[38]

Korean

The Chinese abacus migrated from China to Korea around 1400
AD.[39][40][41] Koreans call it _jupan_ (주판), _supan_ (수판) or
_jusan_ (주산).[42] The four beads abacus( 1:4 ) was introduced to Korea
Goryeo Dynasty from the China during Song Dynasty, later the five beads
abacus (5:1) abacus was introduced to Korean from China during the Ming
Dynasty.

Native American

Quipu.png quipu]] Yupana_1.png as used by the Incas.]] Some sources
mention the use of an abacus called a _nepohualtzintzin_ in ancient
Aztec culture.[43] This Mesoamerican abacus used a 5-digit base-20
system.[44] The word Nepōhualtzintzin comes from Nahuatl and it is
formed by the roots; _Ne_ – personal -; _pōhual_ or _pōhualli_ – the
account -; and _tzintzin_ – small similar elements. Its complete meaning
was taken as: counting with small similar elements by somebody. Its use
was taught in the Calmecac to the _temalpouhqueh_ , who were students
dedicated to take the accounts of skies, from childhood.

The Nepōhualtzintzin was divided in two main parts separated by a bar or
intermediate cord. In the left part there were four beads, which in the
first row have unitary values (1, 2, 3, and 4), and in the right side
there are three beads with values of 5, 10, and 15 respectively. In
order to know the value of the respective beads of the upper rows, it is
enough to multiply by 20 (by each row), the value of the corresponding
account in the first row.

Altogether, there were 13 rows with 7 beads in each one, which made up
91 beads in each Nepōhualtzintzin. This was a basic number to
understand, 7 times 13, a close relation conceived between natural
phenomena, the underworld and the cycles of the heavens. One
Nepōhualtzintzin (91) represented the number of days that a season of
the year lasts, two Nepōhualtzitzin (182) is the number of days of the
corn's cycle, from its sowing to its harvest, three Nepōhualtzintzin
(273) is the number of days of a baby's gestation, and four
Nepōhualtzintzin (364) completed a cycle and approximate a year (1 days
short). When translated into modern computer arithmetic, the
Nepōhualtzintzin amounted to the rank from 10 to the 18 in floating
point, which calculated stellar as well as infinitesimal amounts with
absolute precision, meant that no round off was allowed.

The rediscovery of the Nepōhualtzintzin was due to the Mexican engineer
David Esparza Hidalgo,[45] who in his wanderings throughout Mexico found
diverse engravings and paintings of this instrument and reconstructed
several of them made in gold, jade, encrustations of shell, etc.[46]
There have also been found very old Nepōhualtzintzin attributed to the
Olmec culture, and even some bracelets of Mayan origin, as well as a
diversity of forms and materials in other cultures.

George I. Sanchez, "Arithmetic in Maya", Austin-Texas, 1961 found
another base 5, base 4 abacus in the Yucatán Peninsula that also
computed calendar data. This was a finger abacus, on one hand 0, 1, 2,
3, and 4 were used; and on the other hand 0, 1, 2 and 3 were used. Note
the use of zero at the beginning and end of the two cycles. Sanchez
worked with Sylvanus Morley, a noted Mayanist.

The quipu of the Incas was a system of colored knotted cords used to
record numerical data,[47] like advanced tally sticks – but not used to
perform calculations. Calculations were carried out using a yupana
(Quechua for "counting tool"; see figure) which was still in use after
the conquest of Peru. The working principle of a yupana is unknown, but
in 2001 an explanation of the mathematical basis of these instruments
was proposed by Italian mathematician Nicolino De Pasquale. By comparing
the form of several yupanas, researchers found that calculations were
based using the Fibonacci sequence 1, 1, 2, 3, 5 and powers of 10, 20
and 40 as place values for the different fields in the instrument. Using
the Fibonacci sequence would keep the number of grains within any one
field at a minimum.[48]

Russian

Schoty_abacus.jpg The Russian abacus, the _schoty_ (, plural from ,
counting), usually has a single slanted deck, with ten beads on each
wire (except one wire, usually positioned near the user, with four beads
for quarter-ruble fractions). Older models have another 4-bead wire for
quarter-kopeks, which were minted until 1916. The Russian abacus is
often used vertically, with wires from left to right in the manner of a
book. The wires are usually bowed to bulge upward in the center, to keep
the beads pinned to either of the two sides. It is cleared when all the
beads are moved to the right. During manipulation, beads are moved to
the left. For easy viewing, the middle 2 beads on each wire (the 5th and
6th bead) usually are of a different color from the other eight beads.
Likewise, the left bead of the thousands wire (and the million wire, if
present) may have a different color.

As a simple, cheap and reliable device, the Russian abacus was in use in
all shops and markets throughout the former Soviet Union, and the usage
of it was taught in most schools until the 1990s.[49][50] Even the 1874
invention of mechanical calculator, Odhner arithmometer, had not
replaced them in Russia and likewise the mass production of Felix
arithmometers since 1924 did not significantly reduce their use in the
Soviet Union.[51] The Russian abacus began to lose popularity only after
the mass production of microcalculators had started in the Soviet Union
in 1974. Today it is regarded as an archaism and replaced by the
handheld calculator.

The Russian abacus was brought to France around 1820 by the
mathematician Jean-Victor Poncelet, who served in Napoleon's army and
had been a prisoner of war in Russia.[52] The abacus had fallen out of
use in western Europe in the 16th century with the rise of decimal
notation and algorismic methods. To Poncelet's French contemporaries, it
was something new. Poncelet used it, not for any applied purpose, but as
a teaching and demonstration aid.[53] The Turks and the Armenian people
also used abacuses similar to the Russian schoty. It was named a
_coulba_ by the Turks and a _choreb_ by the Armenians.[54]


School abacus

Kugleramme.jpg Telraam.JPG Around the world, abacuses have been used in
pre-schools and elementary schools as an aid in teaching the numeral
system and arithmetic.

In Western countries, a bead frame similar to the Russian abacus but
with straight wires and a vertical frame has been common (see image). It
is still often seen as a plastic or wooden toy.

The wire frame may be used either with positional notation like other
abacuses (thus the 10-wire version may represent numbers up to
9,999,999,999), or each bead may represent one unit (so that e.g. 74 can
be represented by shifting all beads on 7 wires and 4 beads on the 8th
wire, so numbers up to 100 may be represented). Teaching multiplication,
e.g. 6 times 7 may be represented by shifting 7 beads on 6 wires. In the
bead frame shown, the gap between the 5th and 6th wire, corresponding to
the color change between the 5th and the 6th bead on each wire, suggests
the latter use.

The red-and-white abacus is used in contemporary primary schools for a
wide range of number-related lessons. The twenty bead version, referred
to by its Dutch name _rekenrek_ ("calculating frame"), is often used,
sometimes on a string of beads, sometimes on a rigid framework.[55]


Neurological analysis

By learning how to calculate with abacus, one can improve one's mental
calculation which becomes faster and more accurate in doing large number
calculations. Abacus‐based mental calculation (AMC) was derived from the
abacus which means doing calculation, including addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division, in mind with an imagined abacus. It is a
high-level cognitive skill that run through calculations with an
effective algorithm. People doing long-term AMC training show higher
numerical memory capacity and have more effectively connected neural
pathways.[56][57] They are able to retrieve memory to deal with complex
processes to calculate.[58] The processing of AMC involves both the
visuospatial and visuomotor processing which generate the visual abacus
and perform the movement of the imaginary bead.[59] Since the only thing
needed to be remembered is the finial position of beads, it takes less
memory and less computation time.[60]


Renaissance abacuses gallery

File:Gregor Reisch, Margarita Philosophica, 1508 (1230x1615).png
File:Rechentisch.png File:Rechnung auff der Linihen und Federn.JPG
File:Köbel Böschenteyn 1514.jpg File:Rechnung auff der linihen 1525 Adam
Ries.PNG File:1543 Robert Recorde.PNG File:Peter Apian 1544.PNG
File:Adam riesen.jpg File:Rekenaar 1553.jpg


Uses by the blind

An adapted abacus, invented by Tim Cranmer, called a CRANMER ABACUS is
still commonly used by individuals who are blind. A piece of soft fabric
or rubber is placed behind the beads so that they do not move
inadvertently. This keeps the beads in place while the users feel or
manipulate them. They use an abacus to perform the mathematical
functions multiplication, division, addition, subtraction, square root
and cube root.[61]

Although blind students have benefited from talking calculators, the
abacus is still very often taught to these students in early grades,
both in public schools and state schools for the blind.[62] Blind
students also complete mathematical assignments using a braille-writer
and Nemeth code (a type of braille code for mathematics) but large
multiplication and long division problems can be long and difficult. The
abacus gives blind and visually impaired students a tool to compute
mathematical problems that equals the speed and mathematical knowledge
required by their sighted peers using pencil and paper. Many blind
people find this number machine a very useful tool throughout life.[63]


Binary abacus

Bbinary_Abacus_002.jpg The binary abacus is used to explain how
computers manipulate numbers.[64] The abacus shows how numbers, letters,
and signs can be stored in a binary system on a computer, or via ASCII.
The device consists of a series of beads on parallel wires arranged in
three separate rows. The beads represent a switch on the computer in
either an "on" or "off" position.


See also

-   Chinese Zhusuan
-   Chisanbop
-   Logical abacus
-   Mental abacus
-   Napier's bones
-   Sand table
-   Slide rule
-   Soroban
-   Suanpan


Notes


Footnotes


References

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -


Further reading

-   -   -   -   -   -


External links

-

Tutorials

-   -   Min Multimedia
-

Abacus curiosities

-   -   Abacus in Various Number Systems at cut-the-knot
-   Java applet of Chinese, Japanese and Russian abaci
-   An atomic-scale abacus
-   Examples of Abaci
-   Aztex Abacus

Abacus Category:Mathematical tools Category:Chinese mathematics
Category:Egyptian mathematics Category:Greek mathematics Category:Indian
mathematics Category:Japanese mathematics Category:Roman mathematics

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]