In abstract algebra, an ALGEBRAICALLY CLOSED FIELD _F_ contains a root for every non-constant polynomial in _F_[_x_], the ring of polynomials in the variable _x_ with coefficients in _F_.


Examples

As an example, the field of real numbers is not algebraically closed, because the polynomial equation _x_² + 1 = 0  has no solution in real numbers, even though all its coefficients (1 and 0) are real. The same argument proves that no subfield of the real field is algebraically closed; in particular, the field of rational numbers is not algebraically closed. Also, no finite field _F_ is algebraically closed, because if _a_₁, _a_₂, ..., _a_(n)_ are the elements of _F_, then the polynomial (_x_ − _a_₁)(_x_ − _a_₂) ··· (_x_ − _a__(_n_)) + 1 has no zero in _F_. By contrast, the fundamental theorem of algebra states that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed. Another example of an algebraically closed field is the field of (complex) algebraic numbers.


Equivalent properties

Given a field _F_, the assertion "_F_ is algebraically closed" is equivalent to other assertions:

The only irreducible polynomials are those of degree one

The field _F_ is algebraically closed if and only if the only irreducible polynomials in the polynomial ring _F_[_x_] are those of degree one.

The assertion "the polynomials of degree one are irreducible" is trivially true for any field. If _F_ is algebraically closed and _p_(_x_) is an irreducible polynomial of _F_[_x_], then it has some root _a_ and therefore _p_(_x_) is a multiple of _x_ − _a_. Since _p_(_x_) is irreducible, this means that _p_(_x_) = _k_(_x_ − _a_), for some _k_ ∈ _F_ \ {0}. On the other hand, if _F_ is not algebraically closed, then there is some non-constant polynomial _p_(_x_) in _F_[_x_] without roots in _F_. Let _q_(_x_) be some irreducible factor of _p_(_x_). Since _p_(_x_) has no roots in _F_, _q_(_x_) also has no roots in _F_. Therefore, _q_(_x_) has degree greater than one, since every first degree polynomial has one root in _F_.

Every polynomial is a product of first degree polynomials

The field _F_ is algebraically closed if and only if every polynomial _p_(_x_) of degree _n_ ≥ 1, with coefficients in _F_, splits into linear factors. In other words, there are elements _k_, _x_₁, _x_₂, ..., _x_(n)_ of the field _F_ such that _p_(_x_) = _k_(_x_ − _x_₁)(_x_ − _x_₂) ··· (_x_ − _x_(n)_).

If _F_ has this property, then clearly every non-constant polynomial in _F_[_x_] has some root in _F_; in other words, _F_ is algebraically closed. On the other hand, that the property stated here holds for _F_ if _F_ is algebraically closed follows from the previous property together with the fact that, for any field _K_, any polynomial in _K_[_x_] can be written as a product of irreducible polynomials.

Polynomials of prime degree have roots

If every polynomial over _F_ of prime degree has a root in _F_, then every non-constant polynomial has a root in _F_.[1] It follows that a field is algebraically closed if and only if every polynomial over _F_ of prime degree has a root in _F_.

The field has no proper algebraic extension

The field _F_ is algebraically closed if and only if it has no proper algebraic extension.

If _F_ has no proper algebraic extension, let _p_(_x_) be some irreducible polynomial in _F_[_x_]. Then the quotient of _F_[_x_] modulo the ideal generated by _p_(_x_) is an algebraic extension of _F_ whose degree is equal to the degree of _p_(_x_). Since it is not a proper extension, its degree is 1 and therefore the degree of _p_(_x_) is 1.

On the other hand, if _F_ has some proper algebraic extension _K_, then the minimal polynomial of an element in _K_ \ _F_ is irreducible and its degree is greater than 1.

The field has no proper finite extension

The field _F_ is algebraically closed if and only if it has no finite algebraic extension because if, within the previous proof, the term "algebraic extension" is replaced by the term "finite extension", then the proof is still valid.

Every endomorphism of _F^(n)_ has some eigenvector

The field _F_ is algebraically closed if and only if, for each natural number _n_, every linear map from _F^(n)_ into itself has some eigenvector.

An endomorphism of _F^(n)_ has an eigenvector if and only if its characteristic polynomial has some root. Therefore, when _F_ is algebraically closed, every endomorphism of _F^(n)_ has some eigenvector. On the other hand, if every endomorphism of _F^(n)_ has an eigenvector, let _p_(_x_) be an element of _F_[_x_]. Dividing by its leading coefficient, we get another polynomial _q_(_x_) which has roots if and only if _p_(_x_) has roots. But if _q_(_x_) = _x^(n)_ + _a__(_n_ − 1)_x_^(_n_ − 1)+ ··· + _a_₀, then _q_(_x_) is the characteristic polynomial of the _n×n_ companion matrix

$$\begin{pmatrix}0&0&\cdots&0&-a_0\\1&0&\cdots&0&-a_1\\0&1&\cdots&0&-a_2\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots&\vdots\\0&0&\cdots&1&-a_{n-1}\end{pmatrix}.$$

Decomposition of rational expressions

The field _F_ is algebraically closed if and only if every rational function in one variable _x_, with coefficients in _F_, can be written as the sum of a polynomial function with rational functions of the form _a_/(_x_ − _b_)^(n), where _n_ is a natural number, and _a_ and _b_ are elements of _F_.

If _F_ is algebraically closed then, since the irreducible polynomials in _F_[_x_] are all of degree 1, the property stated above holds by the theorem on partial fraction decomposition.

On the other hand, suppose that the property stated above holds for the field _F_. Let _p_(_x_) be an irreducible element in _F_[_x_]. Then the rational function 1/_p_ can be written as the sum of a polynomial function _q_ with rational functions of the form _a_/(_x_ − _b_)^(n). Therefore, the rational expression

$$\frac1{p(x)}-q(x)=\frac{1-p(x)q(x)}{p(x)}$$
can be written as a quotient of two polynomials in which the denominator is a product of first degree polynomials. Since _p_(_x_) is irreducible, it must divide this product and, therefore, it must also be a first degree polynomial.

Relatively prime polynomials and roots

For any field _F_, if two polynomials _p_(_x_),_q_(_x_) ∈ _F_[_x_] are relatively prime then they do not have a common root, for if _a_ ∈ _F_ was a common root, then _p_(_x_) and  _q_(_x_) would both be multiples of _x_ − _a_ and therefore they would not be relatively prime. The fields for which the reverse implication holds (that is, the fields such that whenever two polynomials have no common root then they are relatively prime) are precisely the algebraically closed fields.

If the field _F_ is algebraically closed, let _p_(_x_) and _q_(_x_) be two polynomials which are not relatively prime and let _r_(_x_) be their greatest common divisor. Then, since _r_(_x_) is not constant, it will have some root _a_, which will be then a common root of _p_(_x_) and _q_(_x_).

If _F_ is not algebraically closed, let _p_(_x_) be a polynomial whose degree is at least 1 without roots. Then _p_(_x_) and _p_(_x_) are not relatively prime, but they have no common roots (since none of them has roots).


Other properties

If _F_ is an algebraically closed field and _n_ is a natural number, then _F_ contains all _n_th roots of unity, because these are (by definition) the _n_ (not necessarily distinct) zeroes of the polynomial _x^(n)_ − 1. A field extension that is contained in an extension generated by the roots of unity is a _cyclotomic extension_, and the extension of a field generated by all roots of unity is sometimes called its _cyclotomic closure_. Thus algebraically closed fields are cyclotomically closed. The converse is not true. Even assuming that every polynomial of the form _x^(n)_ − _a_ splits into linear factors is not enough to assure that the field is algebraically closed.

If a proposition which can be expressed in the language of first-order logic is true for an algebraically closed field, then it is true for every algebraically closed field with the same characteristic. Furthermore, if such a proposition is valid for an algebraically closed field with characteristic 0, then not only is it valid for all other algebraically closed fields with characteristic 0, but there is some natural number _N_ such that the proposition is valid for every algebraically closed field with characteristic _p_ when _p_ > _N_.[2]

Every field _F_ has some extension which is algebraically closed. Such an extension is called an ALGEBRAICALLY CLOSED EXTENSION. Among all such extensions there is one and only one (up to isomorphism, but not unique isomorphism) which is an algebraic extension of _F_;[3] it is called the algebraic closure of _F_.

The theory of algebraically closed fields has quantifier elimination.


Notes


References

-   -   -   -

Category:Field theory

[1] Shipman, J. Improving the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra _The Mathematical Intelligencer_, Volume 29 (2007), Number 4. pp. 9-14

[2] See subsections _Rings and fields_ and _Properties of mathematical theories_ in §2 of J. Barwise's "An introduction to first-order logic".

[3] See Lang's _Algebra_, §VII.2 or van der Waerden's _Algebra I_, §10.1.