ALGERIA ( ; , ; ), officially the PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
ALGERIA (, ), is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa. The
capital and most populous city is Algiers, located in the far north of
the country on the Mediterranean coast. With an area of , Algeria is the
tenth-largest country in the world, the world's largest Arab country,
and the largest in Africa.[1] Algeria is bordered to the northeast by
Tunisia, to the east by Libya, to the west by Morocco, to the southwest
by the Western Saharan territory, Mauritania, and Mali, to the southeast
by Niger, and to the north by the Mediterranean Sea. The country is a
semi-presidential republic consisting of 48 provinces and 1,541 communes
(counties). It has the highest human development index of all non-island
African countries.

Ancient Algeria has known many empires and dynasties, including ancient
Numidians, Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, Byzantines,
Umayyads, Abbasids, Idrisid, Aghlabid, Rustamid, Fatimids, Zirid,
Hammadids, Almoravids, Almohads, Spaniards, Ottomans and the French
colonial empire. Berbers are the indigenous inhabitants of Algeria.

Algeria is a regional and middle power. It supplies large amounts of
natural gas to Europe, and energy exports are the backbone of the
economy. According to OPEC Algeria has the 16th largest oil reserves in
the world and the second largest in Africa, while it has the 9th largest
reserves of natural gas. Sonatrach, the national oil company, is the
largest company in Africa. Algeria has one of the largest militaries in
Africa and the largest defence budget on the continent; most of
Algeria's weapons are imported from Russia, with whom they are a close
ally.[2][3] Algeria is a member of the African Union, the Arab League,
OPEC, the United Nations and is a founding member of the Arab Maghreb
Union.

On 2 April 2019, president Abdelaziz Bouteflika resigned after nearly 20
years in power, following pressure from mass protests against a fifth
term.


Etymology

The country's name derives from the city of Algiers. The city's name in
turn derives from the Arabic (, "The Islands"),[4] a truncated form of
the older (, "Islands of the Mazghanna Tribe"),[5][6][7] employed by
medieval geographers such as al-Idrisi.


History

Ancient history

Djémila-109038.jpg]] In the region of Ain Hanech (Saïda Province), early
remnants (200,000 BC) of hominid occupation in North Africa were found.
Neanderthal tool makers produced hand axes in the Levalloisian and
Mousterian styles (43,000 BC) similar to those in the Levant.[8][9]
Algeria was the site of the highest state of development of Middle
Paleolithic Flake tool techniques.[10] Tools of this era, starting about
30,000 BC, are called Aterian (after the archeological site of Bir el
Ater, south of Tebessa).

The earliest blade industries in North Africa are called Iberomaurusian
(located mainly in the Oran region). This industry appears to have
spread throughout the coastal regions of the Maghreb between 15,000 and
10,000 BC. Neolithic civilization (animal domestication and agriculture)
developed in the Saharan and Mediterranean Maghreb perhaps as early as
11,000 BC[11] or as late as between 6000 and 2000 BC. This life, richly
depicted in the Tassili n'Ajjer paintings, predominated in Algeria until
the classical period. The mixture of peoples of North Africa coalesced
eventually into a distinct native population that came to be called
Berbers, who are the indigenous peoples of northern Africa.[12]

Timgad_rue.jpg ruins of Timgadon the street leading to the local Arch of
Trajan]]

From their principal center of power at Carthage, the Carthaginians
expanded and established small settlements along the North African
coast; by 600 BC, a Phoenician presence existed at Tipasa, east of
Cherchell, Hippo Regius (modern Annaba) and Rusicade (modern Skikda).
These settlements served as market towns as well as anchorages.

As Carthaginian power grew, its impact on the indigenous population
increased dramatically. Berber civilization was already at a stage in
which agriculture, manufacturing, trade, and political organization
supported several states. Trade links between Carthage and the Berbers
in the interior grew, but territorial expansion also resulted in the
enslavement or military recruitment of some Berbers and in the
extraction of tribute from others.

By the early 4th century BC, Berbers formed the single largest element
of the Carthaginian army. In the Revolt of the Mercenaries, Berber
soldiers rebelled from 241 to 238 BC after being unpaid following the
defeat of Carthage in the First Punic War.[13] They succeeded in
obtaining control of much of Carthage's North African territory, and
they minted coins bearing the name Libyan, used in Greek to describe
natives of North Africa. The Carthaginian state declined because of
successive defeats by the Romans in the Punic Wars.[14]

In 146 BC the city of Carthage was destroyed. As Carthaginian power
waned, the influence of Berber leaders in the hinterland grew. By the
2nd century BC, several large but loosely administered Berber kingdoms
had emerged. Two of them were established in Numidia, behind the coastal
areas controlled by Carthage. West of Numidia lay Mauretania, which
extended across the Moulouya River in modern-day Morocco to the Atlantic
Ocean. The high point of Berber civilization, unequaled until the coming
of the Almohads and Almoravids more than a millennium later, was reached
during the reign of Masinissa in the 2nd century BC.
Egypt,_Rome,_Carthage_and_Numidia.jpg along with Egypt, Rome, and
Carthage 200 BC]] After Masinissa's death in 148 BC, the Berber kingdoms
were divided and reunited several times. Masinissa's line survived until
24 AD, when the remaining Berber territory was annexed to the Roman
Empire.

For several centuries Algeria was ruled by the Romans, who founded many
colonies in the region. Like the rest of North Africa, Algeria was one
of the breadbaskets of the empire, exporting cereals and other
agricultural products. Saint Augustine was the bishop of Hippo Regius
(modern-day Algeria), located in the Roman province of Africa. The
Germanic Vandals of Geiseric moved into North Africa in 429, and by 435
controlled coastal Numidia.[15] They did not make any significant
settlement on the land, as they were harassed by local tribes. In fact,
by the time the Byzantines arrived Leptis Magna was abandoned and the
Msellata region was occupied by the indigenous Laguatan who had been
busy facilitating an Amazigh political, military and cultural
revival.[16][17]

Middle Ages

Mansourah-1.jpg

After negligible resistance from the locals, Muslim Arabs of the Umayyad
Caliphate conquered Algeria in the early 8th century. Large numbers of
the indigenous Berber people converted to Islam. Christians, Berber and
Latin speakers remained in the great majority in Tunisia until the end
of the 9th century and Muslims only became a vast majority some time in
the 10th.[18] After the fall of the Umayyad Caliphate, numerous local
dynasties emerged, including the Aghlabids, Almohads, Abdalwadid,
Zirids, Rustamids, Hammadids, Almoravids and the Fatimids. The
Christians left in three waves: after the initial conquest, in the 10th
century and the 11th. The last were evacuated to Sicily by the Normans
and the few remaining died out in the 14th century.[19]

During the Middle Ages, North Africa was home to many great scholars,
saints and sovereigns including Judah Ibn Quraysh, the first grammarian
to mention Semitic and Berber languages, the great Sufi masters Sidi
Boumediene (Abu Madyan) and Sidi El Houari, and the Emirs Abd Al Mu'min
and Yāghmūrasen. It was during this time that the Fatimids or children
of Fatima, daughter of Muhammad, came to the Maghreb. These "Fatimids"
went on to found a long lasting dynasty stretching across the Maghreb,
Hejaz and the Levant, boasting a secular inner government, as well as a
powerful army and navy, made up primarily of Arabs and Levantines
extending from Algeria to their capital state of Cairo. The Fatimid
caliphate began to collapse when its governors the Zirids seceded. In
order to punish them the Fatimids sent the Arab Banu Hilal and Banu
Sulaym against them. The resultant war is recounted in the epic
Tāghribāt. In Al-Tāghrībāt the Amazigh Zirid Hero Khālīfā Al-Zānatī asks
daily, for duels, to defeat the Hilalan hero Ābu Zayd al-Hilalī and many
other Arab knights in a string of victories. The Zirids, however, were
ultimately defeated ushering in an adoption of Arab customs and culture.
The indigenous Amazigh tribes, however, remained largely independent,
and depending on tribe, location and time controlled varying parts of
the Maghreb, at times unifying it (as under the Fatimids). The Fatimid
Islamic state, also known as Fatimid Caliphate made an Islamic empire
that included North Africa, Sicily, Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria,
Egypt, the Red Sea coast of Africa, Tihamah, Hejaz and
Yemen.[20][21][22] Caliphates from Northern Africa traded with the other
empires of their time, as well as forming part of a confederated support
and trade network with other Islamic states during the Islamic Era.

Fatimid_Caliphate.PNG Ismaili dynasty that ruled much of North Africa,
c. 960–1100]]

The Amazighs historically consisted of several tribes. The two main
branches were the Botr and Barnès tribes, who were divided into tribes,
and again into sub-tribes. Each region of the Maghreb contained several
tribes (for example, Sanhadja, Houara, Zenata, Masmouda, Kutama, Awarba,
and Berghwata). All these tribes made independent territorial
decisions.[23]

Several Amazigh dynasties emerged during the Middle Ages in the Maghreb
and other nearby lands. Ibn Khaldun provides a table summarising the
Amazigh dynasties of the Maghreb region, the Zirid, Banu Ifran,
Maghrawa, Almoravid, Hammadid, Almohad, Merinid, Abdalwadid, Wattasid,
Meknassa and Hafsid dynasties.[24]

Empire_almohade.PNG at its greatest extent, c. 1212]]

There reigned in Ifriqiya, current Tunisia, a Berber family, Zirid,
somehow recognising the suzerainty of the Fatimid caliph of Cairo.
Probably in 1048, the Zirid ruler or viceroy, el-Mu'izz, decided to end
this suzerainty. The Fatimid state was too weak to attempt a punitive
expedition; The Viceroy, el-Mu'izz, also found another means of revenge.

Between the Nile and the Red Sea were living Bedouin tribes expelled
from Arabia for their disruption and turbulent influence, both Banu
Hilal and Banu Sulaym among others, whose presence disrupted farmers in
the Nile Valley since the nomads would often loot. The then Fatimid
vizier devised to relinquish control of the Maghreb and obtained the
agreement of his sovereign. This not only prompted the Bedouins to
leave, but the Fatimid treasury even gave them a light expatriation cash
allowance.

Whole tribes set off with women, children, ancestors, animals and
camping equipment. Some stopped on the way, especially in Cyrenaica,
where they are still one of the essential elements of the settlement but
most arrived in Ifriqiya by the Gabes region. The Zirid ruler tried to
stop this rising tide, but with each encounter, the last under the walls
of Kairouan, his troops were defeated and the Arabs remained masters of
the field.

The flood was still rising, and in 1057, the Arabs spread on the high
plains of Constantine where they gradually choked Qalaa of Banu Hammad,
as they had done in Kairouan a few decades ago. From there they
gradually gained the upper Algiers and Oran plains. Some were forcibly
taken by the Almohads in the second half of the 12th century. We can say
that in the 13th century the Arabs were in all of North Africa, with the
exception of the main mountain ranges and certain coastal regions which
remained entirely Berber. The influx of Bedouin tribes was a major
factor in the linguistic, cultural Arabization of the Maghreb and in the
spread of nomadism in areas where agriculture had previously been
dominant.[25] Ibn Khaldun noted that the lands ravaged by Banu Hilal
tribes had become completely arid desert.[26]

In the early 16th century, Spain constructed fortified outposts
(presidios) on or near the Algerian coast. Spain took control of few
coastal towns like Mers el Kebir in 1505; Oran in 1509; and Tlemcen,
Mostaganem and Ténès in 1510. In the same year, a few merchants of
Algiers ceded one of the rocky islets in their harbour to Spain, which
built a fort on it. The presidios in North Africa turned out to be a
costly and largely ineffective military endeavour that did not guarantee
access for Spain's merchant fleet.[27]

Ottoman era

Maghreb_15th_Century.svg of Tlemcen in the fifteenth century and its
neighbors]]

The region of Algeria was partially ruled by Ottomans for three
centuries from 1516 to 1830. In 1516 the Turkish privateer brothers Aruj
and Hayreddin Barbarossa, who operated successfully under the Hafsids,
moved their base of operations to Algiers. They succeeded in conquering
Jijel and Algiers from the Spaniards but eventually assumed control over
the city and the surrounding region, forcing the previous ruler, Abu
Hamo Musa III of the _Bani Ziyad_ dynasty, to flee.[28] When Aruj was
killed in 1518 during his invasion of Tlemcen, Hayreddin succeeded him
as military commander of Algiers. The Ottoman sultan gave him the title
of beylerbey and a contingent of some 2,000 janissaries. With the aid of
this force, Hayreddin conquered the whole area between Constantine and
Oran (although the city of Oran remained in Spanish hands until
1792).[29][30]

Barbarossa_Hayreddin_Pasha.jpg]]

The next beylerbey was Hayreddin's son Hasan, who assumed the position
in 1544. Until 1587 the area was governed by officers who served terms
with no fixed limits. Subsequently, with the institution of a regular
Ottoman administration, governors with the title of pasha ruled for
three-year terms. The pasha was assisted by janissaries, known in
Algeria as the ojaq and led by an agha. Discontent among the ojaq rose
in the mid-1600s because they were not paid regularly, and they
repeatedly revolted against the pasha. As a result, the agha charged the
pasha with corruption and incompetence and seized power in 1659.[31]

Plague had repeatedly struck the cities of North Africa. Algiers lost
from 30,000 to 50,000 inhabitants to the plague in 1620–21, and suffered
high fatalities in 1654–57, 1665, 1691 and 1740–42.[32]

In 1671, the taifa rebelled, killed the agha, and placed one of its own
in power. The new leader received the title of Dey. After 1689, the
right to select the dey passed to the divan, a council of some sixty
nobles. It was at first dominated by the _ojaq_; but by the 18th
century, it had become the dey's instrument. In 1710, the dey persuaded
the sultan to recognise him and his successors as regent, replacing the
pasha in that role, although Algiers remained a part of the Ottoman
Empire.[33]

The dey was in effect a constitutional autocrat. The dey was elected for
a life term, but in the 159 years (1671–1830) that the system survived,
fourteen of the twenty-nine deys were assassinated. Despite usurpation,
military coups and occasional mob rule, the day-to-day operation of
Ottoman government was remarkably orderly. Although the regency
patronised the tribal chieftains, it never had the unanimous allegiance
of the countryside, where heavy taxation frequently provoked unrest.
Autonomous tribal states were tolerated, and the regency's authority was
seldom applied in the Kabylie.[34]

Debarquement_et_maltraitement_de_prisonniers_a_alger.JPG in Algiers,
1706]]

The Barbary pirates preyed on Christian and other non-Islamic shipping
in the western Mediterranean Sea.[35] The pirates often took the
passengers and crew on the ships and sold them or used them as
slaves.[36] They also did a brisk business in ransoming some of the
captives. According to Robert Davis, from the 16th to 19th century,
pirates captured 1 million to 1.25 million Europeans as slaves.[37] They
often made raids, called Razzias, on European coastal towns to capture
Christian slaves to sell at slave markets in North Africa and other
parts of the Ottoman Empire.[38][39] In 1544, for example, Hayreddin
Barbarossa captured the island of Ischia, taking 4,000 prisoners, and
enslaved some 9,000 inhabitants of Lipari, almost the entire
population.[40] In 1551, the Ottoman governor of Algiers, Turgut Reis,
enslaved the entire population of the Maltese island of Gozo. Barbary
pirates often attacked the Balearic Islands. The threat was so severe
that residents abandoned the island of Formentera.[41]

De_Engels-Nederlandse_vloot_in_de_Baai_van_Algiers_ter_ondersteuning_van_het_ultimatum_tot_vrijlating_van_blanke_slaven,_26_augustus_1816._Rijksmuseum_SK-A-1377.jpeg
by the Anglo-Dutch fleet, to support the ultimatum to release European
slaves, August 1816]]

Until the 17th century the Barbary pirates used galleys, but a Dutch
renegade of the name of Zymen Danseker taught them the advantage of
using sailing ships.[42][43] In July 1627 two pirate ships from Algiers
under the command of Dutch pirate Jan Janszoon sailed as far as
Iceland,[44] raiding and capturing slaves.[45][46][47] Two weeks earlier
another pirate ship from Salé in Morocco had also raided in Iceland.
Some of the slaves brought to Algiers were later ransomed back to
Iceland, but some chose to stay in Algeria. In 1629 pirate ships from
Algeria raided the Faroe Islands.[48]

Barbary raids in the Mediterranean continued to attack Spanish merchant
shipping, and as a result, the Spanish Navy bombarded Algiers in 1783
and 1784.[49] For the attack in 1784, the Spanish fleet was to be joined
by ships from such traditional enemies of Algiers as Naples, Portugal
and the Knights of Malta. Over 20,000 cannonballs were fired, much of
the city and its fortifications were destroyed and most of the Algerian
fleet was sunk.[50]

In the 19th century, the pirates forged affiliations with Caribbean
powers, paying a "licence tax" in exchange for safe harbour of their
vessels.[51]

Piracy on American vessels in the Mediterranean resulted in the United
States initiating the First (1801–1805) and Second Barbary Wars (1815).
Following those wars, Algeria was weaker and Europeans, with an
Anglo-Dutch fleet commanded by the British Lord Exmouth, attacked
Algiers. After a nine-hour bombardment, they obtained a treaty from the
Dey that reaffirmed the conditions imposed by Captain (later Commodore)
Stephen Decatur (U.S. Navy) concerning the demands of tributes. In
addition, the Dey agreed to end the practice of enslaving
Christians.[52]

Despite being removed from Algeria in the 19th century, Spain retained a
presence in Morocco. Algeria consistently opposed Spanish fortresses and
control in nearby Morocco through the 20th century.[53]

French colonization (1830–1962)

Vernet-Combat_de_Somah.jpg

Under the pretext of a slight to their consul, the French invaded and
captured Algiers in 1830.[54][55] Historian Ben Kiernan wrote on the
French conquest of Algeria: "By 1875, the French conquest was complete.
The war had killed approximately 825,000 indigenous Algerians since
1830."[56] French losses from 1831–51 were 92,329 dead in the hospital
and only 3,336 killed in action.[57][58] The population of Algeria,
which stood at about 2.9 million in 1872, reached nearly 11 million in
1960.[59] French policy was predicated on "civilising" the country.[60]
The slave trade and piracy in Algeria ceased following the French
conquest.[61] The conquest of Algeria by the French took some time and
resulted in considerable bloodshed. A combination of violence and
disease epidemics caused the indigenous Algerian population to decline
by nearly one-third from 1830 to 1872.[62][63] During this period, a
small but influential French-speaking indigenous elite was formed, made
up of Berbers, mostly Kabyles. As a consequence, French government
favored the Kabyles.[64] About 80% of Indigenous schools were
constructed for Kabyles.

Abd_al-Qadir.jpg, Algerian leader insurgent against French colonial
rule, 1865]]

From 1848 until independence, France administered the whole
Mediterranean region of Algeria as an integral part and _département_ of
the nation. One of France's longest-held overseas territories, Algeria
became a destination for hundreds of thousands of European immigrants,
who became known as _colons_ and later, as _Pied-Noirs._ Between 1825
and 1847, 50,000 French people emigrated to Algeria.[65][66] These
settlers benefited from the French government's confiscation of communal
land from tribal peoples, and the application of modern agricultural
techniques that increased the amount of arable land.[67] Many Europeans
settled in Oran and Algiers, and by the early 20th century they formed a
majority of the population in both cities.[68]

Six_chefs_FLN_-_1954.jpg, Mostefa Ben Boulaïd, Didouche Mourad, Mohammed
Boudiaf, Krim Belkacem and Larbi Ben M'Hidi.]]

During the late 19th and early 20th century; the European share was
almost a fifth of the population. The French government aimed at making
Algeria an assimilated part of France, and this included substantial
educational investments especially after 1900. The indigenous cultural
and religious resistance heavily opposed this tendency, but in contrast
to the other colonised countries' path in central Asia and Caucasus,
Algeria kept its individual skills and a relatively human-capital
intensive agriculture.[69]

Gradually, dissatisfaction among the Muslim population, which lacked
political and economic status in the colonial system, gave rise to
demands for greater political autonomy and eventually independence from
France. In May 1945, the uprising against the occupying French forces
was suppressed through what is now known as the Sétif and Guelma
massacre. Tensions between the two population groups came to a head in
1954, when the first violent events of what was later called the
Algerian War began. Historians have estimated that between 30,000 and
150,000 Harkis and their dependents were killed by the Front de
Libération Nationale (FLN) or by lynch mobs in Algeria.[70] The FLN used
hit and run attacks in Algeria and France as part of its war, and the
French conducted severe reprisals.

The war led to the death of hundreds of thousands of Algerians and
hundreds of thousands of injuries. Historians, like Alistair Horne and
Raymond Aron, state that the actual number of Algerian Muslim war dead
was far greater than the original FLN and official French estimates but
was less than the 1 million deaths claimed by the Algerian government
after independence. Horne estimated Algerian casualties during the span
of eight years to be around 700,000.[71] The war uprooted more than
2 million Algerians.[72]

The war against French rule concluded in 1962, when Algeria gained
complete independence following the March 1962 Evian agreements and the
July 1962 self-determination referendum.

The first three decades of independence (1962–1991)

The number of European _Pied-Noirs_ who fled Algeria totaled more than
900,000 between 1962 and 1964.[73] The exodus to mainland France
accelerated after the Oran massacre of 1962, in which hundreds of
militants entered European sections of the city, and began attacking
civilians.

Houari_Boumediene's_Portrait.jpg]]

Algeria's first president was the Front de Libération Nationale (FLN)
leader Ahmed Ben Bella. Morocco's claim to portions of western Algeria
led to the Sand War in 1963. Ben Bella was overthrown in 1965 by Houari
Boumédiène, his former ally and defence minister. Under Ben Bella, the
government had become increasingly socialist and authoritarian;
Boumédienne continued this trend. But, he relied much more on the army
for his support, and reduced the sole legal party to a symbolic role. He
collectivised agriculture and launched a massive industrialization
drive. Oil extraction facilities were nationalised. This was especially
beneficial to the leadership after the international 1973 oil crisis.

In the 1960s and 1970s under President Houari Boumediene, Algeria
pursued a program of industrialization within a state-controlled
socialist economy. Boumediene's successor, Chadli Bendjedid, introduced
some liberal economic reforms. He promoted a policy of Arabisation in
Algerian society and public life. Teachers of Arabic, brought in from
other Muslim countries, spread conventional Islamic thought in schools
and sowed the seeds of a return to Orthodox Islam.[74]

The Algerian economy became increasingly dependent on oil, leading to
hardship when the price collapsed during the 1980s oil glut.[75]
Economic recession caused by the crash in world oil prices resulted in
Algerian social unrest during the 1980s; by the end of the decade,
Bendjedid introduced a multi-party system. Political parties developed,
such as the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), a broad coalition of Muslim
groups.[76]

Civil War (1991–2002) and aftermath

Algerian_massacres_1997-1998.png of over 50 people in 1997–1998. The
Armed Islamic Group (GIA) claimed responsibility for many of them.]] In
December 1991 the Islamic Salvation Front dominated the first of two
rounds of legislative elections. Fearing the election of an Islamist
government, the authorities intervened on 11 January 1992, cancelling
the elections. Bendjedid resigned and a High Council of State was
installed to act as the Presidency. It banned the FIS, triggering a
civil insurgency between the Front's armed wing, the Armed Islamic
Group, and the national armed forces, in which more than 100,000 people
are thought to have died. The Islamist militants conducted a violent
campaign of civilian massacres.[77] At several points in the conflict,
the situation in Algeria became a point of international concern, most
notably during the crisis surrounding Air France Flight 8969, a
hijacking perpetrated by the Armed Islamic Group. The Armed Islamic
Group declared a ceasefire in October 1997.[78]

Algeria held elections in 1999, considered biased by international
observers and most opposition groups[79] which were won by President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika. He worked to restore political stability to the
country and announced a "Civil Concord" initiative, approved in a
referendum, under which many political prisoners were pardoned, and
several thousand members of armed groups were granted exemption from
prosecution under a limited amnesty, in force until 13 January 2000. The
AIS disbanded and levels of insurgent violence fell rapidly. The Groupe
Salafiste pour la Prédication et le Combat (GSPC), a splinter group of
the Group Islamic Army, continued a terrorist campaign against the
Government.[80]

Bouteflika was re-elected in the April 2004 presidential election after
campaigning on a programme of national reconciliation. The programme
comprised economic, institutional, political and social reform to
modernise the country, raise living standards, and tackle the causes of
alienation. It also included a second amnesty initiative, the Charter
for Peace and National Reconciliation, which was approved in a
referendum in September 2005. It offered amnesty to most guerrillas and
Government security forces.[81]

In November 2008, the Algerian Constitution was amended following a vote
in Parliament, removing the two-term limit on Presidential incumbents.
This change enabled Bouteflika to stand for re-election in the 2009
presidential elections, and he was re-elected in April 2009. During his
election campaign and following his re-election, Bouteflika promised to
extend the programme of national reconciliation and a $150-billion
spending programme to create three million new jobs, the construction of
one million new housing units, and to continue public sector and
infrastructure modernisation programmes.[82]

A continuing series of protests throughout the country started on 28
December 2010, inspired by similar protests across the Middle East and
North Africa. On 24 February 2011, the government lifted Algeria's
19-year-old state of emergency.[83] The government enacted legislation
dealing with political parties, the electoral code, and the
representation of women in elected bodies.[84] In April 2011, Bouteflika
promised further constitutional and political reform.[85] However,
elections are routinely criticized by opposition groups as unfair and
international human rights groups say that media censorship and
harassment of political opponents continue.

On 2 April 2019, Bouteflika resigned from the presidency.[86]


Geography

Algeria_relief.png, the Hoggar and the Atlas mountains compose the
Algerian relief.]] Algeria is the largest country in Africa, and the
Mediterranean Basin. Its southern part includes a significant portion of
the Sahara. To the north, the Tell Atlas form with the Saharan Atlas,
further south, two parallel sets of reliefs in approaching eastbound,
and between which are inserted vast plains and highlands. Both Atlas
tend to merge in eastern Algeria. The vast mountain ranges of Aures and
Nememcha occupy the entire northeastern Algeria and are delineated by
the Tunisian border. The highest point is Mount Tahat ( m).

Algeria lies mostly between latitudes 19° and 37°N (a small area is
north of 37°N and south of 19°N), and longitudes 9°W and 12°E. Most of
the coastal area is hilly, sometimes even mountainous, and there are a
few natural harbours. The area from the coast to the Tell Atlas is
fertile. South of the Tell Atlas is a steppe landscape ending with the
Saharan Atlas; farther south, there is the Sahara desert.[87]

The Hoggar Mountains (), also known as the Hoggar, are a highland region
in central Sahara, southern Algeria. They are located about south of the
capital, Algiers, and just east of Tamanghasset. Algiers, Oran,
Constantine, and Annaba are Algeria's main cities.[88]

Climate and hydrology

Koppen-Geiger_Map_DZA_present.svg
Algeria_Sahara_Desert_Photo_From_Drone_5.jpg]] In this region, midday
desert temperatures can be hot year round. After sunset, however, the
clear, dry air permits rapid loss of heat, and the nights are cool to
chilly. Enormous daily ranges in temperature are recorded.

Rainfall is fairly plentiful along the coastal part of the Tell Atlas,
ranging from annually, the amount of precipitation increasing from west
to east. Precipitation is heaviest in the northern part of eastern
Algeria, where it reaches as much as in some years.

Farther inland, the rainfall is less plentiful. Algeria also has ergs,
or sand dunes, between mountains. Among these, in the summer time when
winds are heavy and gusty, temperatures can get up to .

Fauna and flora

Cèdre_du_Chélia_13_(Algeria).jpg of Chélia in the Aures]]

The varied vegetation of Algeria includes coastal, mountainous and
grassy desert-like regions which all support a wide range of wildlife.
Many of the creatures comprising the Algerian wildlife live in close
proximity to civilization. The most commonly seen animals include the
wild boars, jackals, and gazelles, although it is not uncommon to spot
fennecs (foxes), and jerboas. Algeria also has a small African leopard
and Saharan cheetah population, but these are seldom seen. A species of
deer, the Barbary stag, inhabits the dense humid forests in the
north-eastern areas.

A variety of bird species makes the country an attraction for bird
watchers. The forests are inhabited by boars and jackals. Barbary
macaques are the sole native monkey. Snakes, monitor lizards, and
numerous other reptiles can be found living among an array of rodents
throughout the semi arid regions of Algeria. Many animals are now
extinct, including the Barbary lions, Atlas bears and crocodiles.[89]

In the north, some of the native flora includes Macchia scrub, olive
trees, oaks, cedars and other conifers. The mountain regions contain
large forests of evergreens (Aleppo pine, juniper, and evergreen oak)
and some deciduous trees. Fig, eucalyptus, agave, and various palm trees
grow in the warmer areas. The grape vine is indigenous to the coast. In
the Sahara region, some oases have palm trees. Acacias with wild olives
are the predominant flora in the remainder of the Sahara.

Camels are used extensively; the desert also abounds with venomous and
nonvenomous snakes, scorpions, and numerous insects.


Politics

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| World_Leaders_Investment_Summit_( | Noureddine_Bedoui.jpg             |
| 7098511567)_(cropped).jpg         |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Abdelkader Bensalah               | Noureddine Bedoui                 |
| Interim President                 | Prime Minister                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Hémicycle_de_l'assemblée_populaire_nationale_(Algérie).jpg]]

Elected politicians have relatively little sway over Algeria. Instead, a
group of unelected civilian and military "décideurs", known as "le
pouvoir" ("the power"), actually rule the country, even deciding who
should be president. The most powerful man may be Mohamed Mediène, the
head of military intelligence.[90] In recent years, many of these
generals have died or retired. After the death of General Larbi
Belkheir, Bouteflika put loyalists in key posts, notably at Sonatrach,
and secured constitutional amendments that make him re-electable
indefinitely.[91]

The head of state is the President of Algeria, who is elected for a
five-year term. The president was formerly limited to two five-year
terms, but a constitutional amendment passed by the Parliament on 11
November 2008 removed this limitation.[92] The next presidential
election was planned to be in April 2019, but widespread protests
erupted in February 22 against the president's decision to participate
in the election, which resulted in President Bouteflika announcing his
resignation on April 3 2. Algeria has universal suffrage at 18 years of
age.[93] The President is the head of the army, the Council of Ministers
and the High Security Council. He appoints the Prime Minister who is
also the head of government.[94] The Algerian parliament is bicameral;
the lower house, the People's National Assembly, has 462 members who are
directly elected for five-year terms, while the upper house, the Council
of the Nation, has 144 members serving six-year terms, of which 96
members are chosen by local assemblies and 48 are appointed by the
president.[95] According to the constitution, no political association
may be formed if it is "based on differences in religion, language,
race, gender, profession, or region". In addition, political campaigns
must be exempt from the aforementioned subjects.[96]

Parliamentary elections were last held in May 2012, and were judged to
be largely free by international monitors, though local groups alleged
fraud and irregularities.[97] In the elections, the FLN won 221 seats,
the military-backed National Rally for Democracy won 70, and the
Islamist Green Algeria Alliance won 47.[98]

Foreign relations

Abdelaziz_Bouteflika_and_George_W_Bush_20080707.jpg and George W. Bush
exchange handshakes at the Windsor Hotel Toya Resort and Spa in Tōyako
Town, Abuta District, Hokkaidō in 2008. With them are Dmitriy Medvedev,
left, and Yasuo Fukuda, right.]]

Algeria is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood
Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
Giving incentives and rewarding best performers, as well as offering
funds in a faster and more flexible manner, are the two main principles
underlying the European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI) that came into
force in 2014. It has a budget of €15.4 billion and provides the bulk of
funding through a number of programmes.

In 2009, the French government agreed to compensate victims of nuclear
tests in Algeria. Defense Minister Herve Morin stated that "It's time
for our country to be at peace with itself, at peace thanks to a system
of compensation and reparations," when presenting the draft law on the
payouts. Algerian officials and activists believe that this is a good
first step and hope that this move would encourage broader
reparation.[99]

Tensions between Algeria and Morocco in relation to the Western Sahara
have been an obstacle to tightening the Arab Maghreb Union, nominally
established in 1989, but which has carried little practical weight.[100]

Military

The military of Algeria consists of the People's National Army (ANP),
the Algerian National Navy (MRA), and the Algerian Air Force (QJJ), plus
the Territorial Air Defence Forces.[101] It is the direct successor of
the National Liberation Army (Armée de Libération Nationale or ALN), the
armed wing of the nationalist National Liberation Front which fought
French colonial occupation during the Algerian War of Independence
(1954–62).

Total military personnel include 147,000 active, 150,000 reserve, and
187,000 paramilitary staff (2008 estimate).[102] Service in the military
is compulsory for men aged 19–30, for a total of 12 months.[103] The
military expenditure was 4.3% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in
2012.[104] Algeria has the second largest military in North Africa with
the largest defence budget in Africa ($10 billion).[105]

In 2007, the Algerian Air Force signed a deal with Russia to purchase 49
MiG-29SMT and 6 MiG-29UBT at an estimated cost of $1.9 billion. Russia
is also building two 636-type diesel submarines for Algeria.[106]

Human rights

Algeria has been categorized by Freedom House as "not free" since it
began publishing such ratings in 1972, with the exception of 1989, 1990,
and 1991, when the country was labeled "partly free."[107] In December
2016, the _Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor_ issued a report
regarding violation of media freedom in Algeria. It clarified that the
Algerian government imposed restriction on freedom of the press;
expression; and right to peaceful demonstration, protest and assembly as
well as intensified censorship of the media and websites. Due to the
fact that the journalists and activists criticize the ruling government,
some media organizations' licenses are canceled.[108]

Independent and autonomous trade unions face routine harassment from the
government, with many leaders imprisoned and protests suppressed. In
2016 a number of unions, many of which were involved in the 2010–2012
Algerian Protests, have been deregistered by the
government.[109][110][111]

Homosexuality is illegal in Algeria.[112] Public homosexual behavior is
punishable by up to two years in prison.[113]


Administrative divisions

Algeria is divided into 48 provinces (_wilayas_), 553 districts
(_daïras_) and 1,541 municipalities (_baladiyahs_). Each province,
district, and municipality is named after its seat, which is usually the
largest city.

The administrative divisions have changed several times since
independence. When introducing new provinces, the numbers of old
provinces are kept, hence the non-alphabetical order. With their
official numbers, currently (since 1983) they are[114]


Economy

Algeria_Export_Treemap.jpg

Algeria is classified as an upper middle income country by the World
Bank.[115] Algeria's currency is the dinar (DZD). The economy remains
dominated by the state, a legacy of the country's socialist
post-independence development model. In recent years, the Algerian
government has halted the privatization of state-owned industries and
imposed restrictions on imports and foreign involvement in its
economy.[116] These restrictions are just starting to be lifted off
recently although questions about Algeria's slowly-diversifying economy
remain.

Algeria has struggled to develop industries outside hydrocarbons in part
because of high costs and an inert state bureaucracy. The government's
efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and domestic
investment outside the energy sector have done little to reduce high
youth unemployment rates or to address housing shortages.[117] The
country is facing a number of short-term and medium-term problems,
including the need to diversify the economy, strengthen political,
economic and financial reforms, improve the business climate and reduce
inequalities amongst regions.[118]

A wave of economic protests in February and March 2011 prompted the
Algerian government to offer more than $23 billion in public grants and
retroactive salary and benefit increases. Public spending has increased
by 27% annually during the past 5 years. The 2010–14 public-investment
programme will cost US$286 billion, 40% of which will go to human
development.[119]

Theatre_d'oran.jpg

The Algerian economy grew by 2.6% in 2011, driven by public spending, in
particular in the construction and public-works sector, and by growing
internal demand. If hydrocarbons are excluded, growth has been estimated
at 4.8%. Growth of 3% is expected in 2012, rising to 4.2% in 2013. The
rate of inflation was 4% and the budget deficit 3% of GDP. The
current-account surplus is estimated at 9.3% of GDP and at the end of
December 2011, official reserves were put at US$182 billion.[120]
Inflation, the lowest in the region, has remained stable at 4% on
average between 2003 and 2007.[121]

Algeria,_Trends_in_the_Human_Development_Index_1970-2010.png 1970–2010]]

In 2011 Algeria announced a budgetary surplus of $26.9 billion, 62%
increase in comparison to 2010 surplus. In general, the country exported
$73 billion worth of commodities while it imported $46 billion.[122]

Thanks to strong hydrocarbon revenues, Algeria has a cushion of $173
billion in foreign currency reserves and a large hydrocarbon
stabilization fund. In addition, Algeria's external debt is extremely
low at about 2% of GDP.[123] The economy remains very dependent on
hydrocarbon wealth, and, despite high foreign exchange reserves (US$178
billion, equivalent to three years of imports), current expenditure
growth makes Algeria's budget more vulnerable to the risk of prolonged
lower hydrocarbon revenues.[124]

In 2011, the agricultural sector and services recorded growth of 10% and
5.3%, respectively.[125] About 14% of the labor force are employed in
the agricultural sector.[126] Fiscal policy in 2011 remained
expansionist and made it possible to maintain the pace of public
investment and to contain the strong demand for jobs and housing.[127]

Algeria has not joined the WTO, despite several years of
negotiations.[128]

In March 2006, Russia agreed to erase $4.74 billion of Algeria's
Soviet-era debt[129] during a visit by Russian President Vladimir Putin
to the country, the first by a Russian leader in half a century. In
return, Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika agreed to buy
$7.5 billion worth of combat planes, air-defence systems and other arms
from Russia, according to the head of Russia's state arms exporter
Rosoboronexport.[130][131]

Dubai-based conglomerate Emarat Dzayer Group said it had signed a joint
venture agreement to develop a $1.6 billion steel factory in
Algeria.[132]

Hydrocarbons

Algeria_pipelines_map.jpg

Algeria, whose economy is reliant on petroleum, has been an OPEC member
since 1969. Its crude oil production stands at around 1.1 million
barrels/day, but it is also a major gas producer and exporter, with
important links to Europe.[133] Hydrocarbons have long been the backbone
of the economy, accounting for roughly 60% of budget revenues, 30% of
GDP, and over 95% of export earnings. Algeria has the 10th-largest
reserves of natural gas in the world and is the sixth-largest gas
exporter. The U.S. Energy Information Administration reported that in
2005, Algeria had of proven natural-gas reserves.[134] It also ranks
16th in oil reserves.[135]

Non-hydrocarbon growth for 2011 was projected at 5%. To cope with social
demands, the authorities raised expenditure, especially on basic food
support, employment creation, support for SMEs, and higher salaries.
High hydrocarbon prices have improved the current account and the
already large international reserves position.[136]

Income from oil and gas rose in 2011 as a result of continuing high oil
prices, though the trend in production volume is downwards.[137]
Production from the oil and gas sector in terms of volume, continues to
decline, dropping from 43.2 million tonnes to 32 million tonnes between
2007 and 2011. Nevertheless, the sector accounted for 98% of the total
volume of exports in 2011, against 48% in 1962,[138] and 70% of
budgetary receipts, or US$71.4 billion.[139]

The Algerian national oil company is Sonatrach, which plays a key role
in all aspects of the oil and natural gas sectors in Algeria. All
foreign operators must work in partnership with Sonatrach, which usually
has majority ownership in production-sharing agreements.[140]

Research and alternative energy sources

Algeria has invested an estimated 100 billion dinars towards developing
research facilities and paying researchers. This development program is
meant to advance alternative energy production, especially solar and
wind power.[141] Algeria is estimated to have the largest solar energy
potential in the Mediterranean, so the government has funded the
creation of a solar science park in Hassi R'Mel. Currently, Algeria has
20,000 research professors at various universities and over 780 research
labs, with state-set goals to expand to 1,000. Besides solar energy,
areas of research in Algeria include space and satellite
telecommunications, nuclear power and medical research.

Labour market

Despite a decline in total unemployment, youth and women unemployment is
high.[142] Unemployment particularly affects the young, with a jobless
rate of 21.5% among the 15–24 age group.[143]

The overall rate of unemployment was 10% in 2011, but remained higher
among young people, with a rate of 21.5% for those aged between 15 and
24. The government strengthened in 2011 the job programmes introduced in
1988, in particular in the framework of the programme to aid those
seeking work (Dispositif d'Aide à l'Insertion Professionnelle).[144]

Tourism

Giants_-_Rock_towers_in_the_Algerian_Sahara.jpg]]

The development of the tourism sector in Algeria had previously been
hampered by a lack of facilities, but since 2004 a broad tourism
development strategy has been implemented resulting in many hotels of a
high modern standard being built.

There are several UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Algeria[145] including
Al Qal'a of Beni Hammad, the first capital of the Hammadid empire;
Tipasa, a Phoenician and later Roman town; and Djémila and Timgad, both
Roman ruins; M'Zab Valley, a limestone valley containing a large
urbanized oasis; and the Casbah of Algiers, an important citadel. The
only natural World Heritage Site is the Tassili n'Ajjer, a mountain
range.

Transport

Autoroute_est_ouest_ghomri2.JPG project]]

The Algerian road network is the densest in Africa; its length is
estimated at of highways, with more than 3,756 structures and a paving
rate of 85%. This network will be complemented by the East-West Highway,
a major infrastructure project currently under construction. It is a
3-way, highway, linking Annaba in the extreme east to the Tlemcen in the
far west. Algeria is also crossed by the Trans-Sahara Highway, which is
now completely paved. This road is supported by the Algerian government
to increase trade between the six countries crossed: Algeria, Mali,
Niger, Nigeria, Chad, and Tunisia.


Demographics

Bevölkerungspyramide_Algerien_2016.png In January 2016 Algeria's
population was an estimated 40.4 million, who are mainly Arab-Berber
ethnically.[146][147][148] At the outset of the 20th century, its
population was approximately four million.[149] About 90% of Algerians
live in the northern, coastal area; the inhabitants of the Sahara desert
are mainly concentrated in oases, although some 1.5 million remain
nomadic or partly nomadic. 28.1% of Algerians are under the age of
15.[150]

Women make up 70% of the country's lawyers and 60% of its judges and
also dominate the field of medicine. Increasingly, women are
contributing more to household income than men. 60% of university
students are women, according to university researchers.[151]

Between 90,000 and 165,000 Sahrawis from Western Sahara live in the
Sahrawi refugee camps,[152][153] in the western Algerian Sahara
desert.[154] There are also more than 4,000 Palestinian refugees, who
are well integrated and have not asked for assistance from the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).[155][156] In 2009,
35,000 Chinese migrant workers lived in Algeria.[157]

The largest concentration of Algerian migrants outside Algeria is in
France, which has reportedly over 1.7 million Algerians of up to the
second generation.[158]

Ethnic groups

Indigenous Berbers as well as Phoenicians, Romans, Byzantine Greeks,
Arabs, Turks, various Sub-Saharan Africans, and French have contributed
to the history of Algeria.[159] Descendants of Andalusian refugees are
also present in the population of Algiers and other cities.[160]
Moreover, Spanish was spoken by these Aragonese and Castillian Morisco
descendants deep into the 18th century, and even Catalan was spoken at
the same time by Catalan Morisco descendants in the small town of Grish
El-Oued.[161]

Tenus_traditionnelles_algériennes_27.png

Despite the dominance of the Berber culture and ethnicity in Algeria,
the majority of Algerians identify with an Arabic-based identity,
especially after the Arab nationalism rising in the 20th
century.[162][163] Berbers and Berber-speaking Algerians are divided
into many groups with varying languages. The largest of these are the
Kabyles, who live in the Kabylie region east of Algiers, the Chaoui of
Northeast Algeria, the Tuaregs in the southern desert and the Shenwa
people of North Algeria.[164]

During the colonial period, there was a large (10% in 1960)[165]
European population who became known as _Pied-Noirs_. They were
primarily of French, Spanish and Italian origin. Almost all of this
population left during the war of independence or immediately after its
end.[166]

Languages

Tizi_Ouzou_Tasdawit.jpg in three languages: Arabic, Berber, and French]]

Modern Standard Arabic and Berber are the official languages.[167]
Algerian Arabic (Darja) is the language used by the majority of the
population. Colloquial Algerian Arabic is heavily infused with
borrowings from French and Berber.

Berber has been recognized as a "national language" by the
constitutional amendment of 8 May 2002.[168] Kabyle, the predominant
Berber language, is taught and is partially co-official (with a few
restrictions) in parts of Kabylie. In February 2016, the Algerian
constitution passed a resolution that would make Berber an official
language alongside Arabic.

Although French has no official status, Algeria is the second-largest
Francophone country in the world in terms of speakers,[169] and French
is widely used in government, media (newspapers, radio, local
television), and both the education system (from primary school onwards)
and academia due to Algeria's colonial history. It can be regarded as a
lingua franca of Algeria. In 2008, 11.2 million Algerians could read and
write in French.[170] An Abassa Institute study in April 2000 found that
60% of households could speak and understand French or 18 million in a
population of 30 million then. After an earlier period during which the
Algerian government tried to phase out French (which is why it has no
official status), in recent decades the government has backtracked and
reinforced the study of French and television programs have reinforced
use of the language.

Algeria emerged as a bilingual state after 1962.[171] Colloquial
Algerian Arabic is spoken by about 72% of the population and Berber by
27–30%.[172]

Religion

Islam is the predominant religion in Algeria, with its adherents, mostly
Sunnis, accounting for 99% of the population according to a 2012 CIA
World Factbook estimate,[173] and 97.9% according to Pew Research in
2010.[174] There are about 150,000 Ibadis in the M'zab Valley in the
region of Ghardaia.

Algeria has given the Muslim world a number of prominent thinkers,
including Emir Abdelkader, Abdelhamid Ben Badis, Mouloud Kacem Naît
Belkacem, Malek Bennabi and Mohamed Arkoun.

Cities

Below is a list of the most important Algerian cities:


Culture

Bensari2.jpg, Ottoman Algeria. Painting by Bachir Yellès]]

Modern Algerian literature, split between Arabic, Tamazight and French,
has been strongly influenced by the country's recent history. Famous
novelists of the 20th century include Mohammed Dib, Albert Camus, Kateb
Yacine and Ahlam Mosteghanemi while Assia Djebar is widely translated.
Among the important novelists of the 1980s were Rachid Mimouni, later
vice-president of Amnesty International, and Tahar Djaout, murdered by
an Islamist group in 1993 for his secularist views.[175]

Malek Bennabi and Frantz Fanon are noted for their thoughts on
decolonization; Augustine of Hippo was born in Tagaste (modern-day Souk
Ahras); and Ibn Khaldun, though born in Tunis, wrote the Muqaddima while
staying in Algeria. The works of the Sanusi family in pre-colonial
times, and of Emir Abdelkader and Sheikh Ben Badis in colonial times,
are widely noted. The Latin author Apuleius was born in Madaurus
(Mdaourouch), in what later became Algeria.

Contemporary Algerian cinema is various in terms of genre, exploring a
wider range of themes and issues. There has been a transition from
cinema which focused on the war of independence to films more concerned
with the everyday lives of Algerians.[176]

Media

Art

Portrait-racim.jpg

Algerian painters, like Mohamed Racim or Baya, attempted to revive the
prestigious Algerian past prior to French colonization, at the same time
that they have contributed to the preservation of the authentic values
of Algeria. In this line, Mohamed Temam, Abdelkhader Houamel have also
returned through this art, scenes from the history of the country, the
habits and customs of the past and the country life. Other new artistic
currents including the one of M'hamed Issiakhem, Mohammed Khadda and
Bachir Yelles, appeared on the scene of Algerian painting, abandoning
figurative classical painting to find new pictorial ways, in order to
adapt Algerian paintings to the new realities of the country through its
struggle and its aspirations. Mohammed Khadda[177] and M'hamed Issiakhem
have been notable in recent years.[178]

Literature

Ahlem_Mosteghanemi_at_Beirut_Book_Fair_2012.JPG, the most widely read
woman writer in the Arab world.[179]]]

The historic roots of Algerian literature go back to the Numidian and
Roman African era, when Apuleius wrote _The Golden Ass_, the only Latin
novel to survive in its entirety. This period had also known Augustine
of Hippo, Nonius Marcellus and Martianus Capella, among many others. The
Middle Ages have known many Arabic writers who revolutionized the Arab
world literature, with authors like Ahmad al-Buni, Ibn Manzur and Ibn
Khaldoun, who wrote the Muqaddimah while staying in Algeria, and many
others.

Albert Camus was an Algerian-born French Pied-Noir author. In 1957 he
was awarded the Nobel Prize in literature.

Today Algeria contains, in its literary landscape, big names having not
only marked the Algerian literature, but also the universal literary
heritage in Arabic and French.

As a first step, Algerian literature was marked by works whose main
concern was the assertion of the Algerian national entity, there is the
publication of novels as the _Algerian trilogy_ of Mohammed Dib, or even
_Nedjma_ of Kateb Yacine novel which is often regarded as a monumental
and major work. Other known writers will contribute to the emergence of
Algerian literature whom include Mouloud Feraoun, Malek Bennabi, Malek
Haddad, Moufdi Zakaria, Abdelhamid Ben Badis, Mohamed Laïd Al-Khalifa,
Mouloud Mammeri, Frantz Fanon, and Assia Djebar.

In the aftermath of the independence, several new authors emerged on the
Algerian literary scene, they will attempt through their works to expose
a number of social problems, among them there are Rachid Boudjedra,
Rachid Mimouni, Leila Sebbar, Tahar Djaout and Tahir Wattar.

Currently, a part of Algerian writers tends to be defined in a
literature of shocking expression, due to the terrorism that occurred
during the 1990s, the other party is defined in a different style of
literature who staged an individualistic conception of the human
adventure. Among the most noted recent works, there is the writer, _the
swallows of Kabul_ and _the attack_ of Yasmina Khadra, _the oath of
barbarians_ of Boualem Sansal, _memory of the flesh_ of Ahlam
Mosteghanemi and the last novel by Assia Djebar _nowhere in my father's
House_.

Music

Chaâbi music is a typically Algerian musical genre characterized by
specific rhythms and of Qacidate (popular poems) in Arabic dialect. The
undisputed master of this music is El Hadj M'Hamed El Anka. The
Constantinois Malouf style is saved by musician from whom Mohamed Tahar
Fergani is a performer.

Anka.jpg]] Cheb_Khaled_performed_in_Oran_on_July_5th_2011.jpg King raï]]

Folk music styles include Bedouin music, characterized by the poetic
songs based on long kacida (poems); Kabyle music, based on a rich
repertoire that is poetry and old tales passed through generations;
Shawiya music, a folklore from diverse areas of the Aurès Mountains.
Rahaba music style is unique to the Aures. Souad Massi is a rising
Algerian folk singer. Other Algerian singers of the diaspora include
Manel Filali in Germany and Kenza Farah in France. Tergui music is sung
in Tuareg languages generally, Tinariwen had a worldwide success.
Finally, the staïfi music is born in Sétif and remains a unique style of
its kind.

Modern music is available in several facets, Raï music is a style
typical of western Algeria. Rap, a relatively recent style in Algeria,
is experiencing significant growth.

Cinema

Chronique_des_annees_de_braise.jpg, the film won the Palme d'Or prize at
the 1975 Cannes Film Festival.[180]]]

The Algerian state's interest in film-industry activities can be seen in
the annual budget of DZD 200 million (EUR 1.8) allocated to production,
specific measures and an ambitious programme plan implemented by the
Ministry of Culture in order to promote national production, renovate
the cinema stock and remedy the weak links in distribution and
exploitation.

The financial support provided by the state, through the Fund for the
Development of the Arts, Techniques and the Film Industry (FDATIC) and
the Algerian Agency for Cultural Influence (AARC), plays a key role in
the promotion of national production. Between 2007 and 2013, FDATIC
subsidised 98 films (feature films, documentaries and short films). In
mid-2013, AARC had already supported a total of 78 films, including 42
feature films, 6 short films and 30 documentaries.

According to the European Audiovisual Observatory's LUMIERE database, 41
Algerian films were distributed in Europe between 1996 and 2013; 21
films in this repertoire were Algerian-French co-productions. _Days of
Glory_ (2006) and _Outside the Law_ (2010) recorded the highest number
of admissions in the European Union, 3,172,612 and 474,722,
respectively.[181]

Algeria won the Palme d'Or for _Chronicle of the Years of Fire_ (1975),
two Oscars for _Z_ (1969), and other awards for the Italian-Algerian
movie _The Battle of Algiers_.

Sports

Various games have existed in Algeria since antiquity. In the Aures,
people played several games such as El Kherba or El khergueba (chess
variant). Playing cards, checkers and chess games are part of Algerian
culture. Racing (fantasia) and rifle shooting are part of cultural
recreation of the Algerians.[182]

The first Algerian and African gold medalist is Boughera El Ouafi in
1928 Olympics of Amsterdam in the Marathon. The second Algerian Medalist
was Alain Mimoun in 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne. Several men and
women were champions in athletics in the 1990s including Noureddine
Morceli, Hassiba Boulmerka, Nouria Merah-Benida, and Taoufik Makhloufi,
all specialized in middle-distance running.[183]

Football is the most popular sport in Algeria. Several names are
engraved in the history of the sport, including Lakhdar Belloumi, Rachid
Mekhloufi, Hassen Lalmas, Rabah Madjer, Salah Assad and Djamel Zidane.
The Algeria national football team qualified for the 1982 FIFA World
Cup, 1986 FIFA World Cup, 2010 FIFA World Cup and 2014 FIFA World Cup.
In addition, several football clubs have won continental and
international trophies as the club ES Sétif or JS Kabylia. The Algerian
Football Federation is an association of Algeria football clubs
organizing national competitions and international matches of the
selection of Algeria national football team.[184]

Cuisine

Bulgur_wheat_salad.jpg-based salad]]

Algerian cuisine is rich and diverse. The country was considered as the
"granary of Rome". It offers a component of dishes and varied dishes,
depending on the region and according to the seasons. The cuisine uses
cereals as the main products, since they are always produced with
abundance in the country. There is not a dish where cereals are not
present.

Algerian cuisine varies from one region to another, according to
seasonal vegetables. It can be prepared using meat, fish and vegetables.
Among the dishes known, couscous,[185] chorba, rechta, chakhchoukha,
berkoukes, shakshouka, mthewem, chtitha, mderbel, dolma, brik or bourek,
garantita, lham'hlou, etc. Merguez sausage is widely used in Algeria,
but it differs, depending on the region and on the added spices.

Cakes are marketed and can be found in cities either in Algeria, in
Europe or North America. However, traditional cakes are also made at
home, following the habits and customs of each family. Among these
cakes, there are Tamina, Baklawa, Chrik, Garn logzelles, Griouech, Kalb
el-louz, Makroud, Mbardja, Mchewek, Samsa, Tcharak, Baghrir, Khfaf,
Zlabia, Aarayech, Ghroubiya and Mghergchette. Algerian pastry also
contains Tunisian or French cakes. Marketed and home-made bread products
include varieties such as Kessra or Khmira or Harchaya, chopsticks and
so-called washers Khoubz dar or Matloue. Other traditional meals sold
often as street food include mhadjeb or mahjouba, karantika, doubara,
chakhchoukha, hassouna, and t'chicha.


Health

In 2002, Algeria had inadequate numbers of physicians (1.13 per 1,000
people), nurses (2.23 per 1,000 people), and dentists (0.31 per 1,000
people). Access to "improved water sources" was limited to 92% of the
population in urban areas and 80% of the population in the rural areas.
Some 99% of Algerians living in urban areas, but only 82% of those
living in rural areas, had access to "improved sanitation". According to
the World Bank, Algeria is making progress toward its goal of "reducing
by half the number of people without sustainable access to improved
drinking water and basic sanitation by 2015". Given Algeria's young
population, policy favors preventive health care and clinics over
hospitals. In keeping with this policy, the government maintains an
immunization program. However, poor sanitation and unclean water still
cause tuberculosis, hepatitis, measles, typhoid fever, cholera and
dysentery. The poor generally receive health care free of charge.[186]

Health records have been maintained in Algeria since 1882 and began
adding Muslims living in the south to their vital record database in
1905 during French rule.[187]


Education

Des_élevesen_Algérie.jpg

Since the 1970s, in a centralized system that was designed to
significantly reduce the rate of illiteracy, the Algerian government
introduced a decree by which school attendance became compulsory for all
children aged between 6 and 15 years who have the ability to track their
learning through the 20 facilities built since independence, now the
literacy rate is around 78.7%.[188]
UIS_Literacy_Rate_Algeria_population_plus15_1980_2015.png literacy rate
Algeria population plus 15 1985–2015]] Since 1972, Arabic is used as the
language of instruction during the first nine years of schooling. From
the third year, French is taught and it is also the language of
instruction for science classes. The students can also learn English,
Italian, Spanish and German. In 2008, new programs at the elementary
appeared, therefore the compulsory schooling does not start at the age
of six anymore, but at the age of five.[189] Apart from the 122 private
schools, the Universities of the State are free of charge. After nine
years of primary school, students can go to the high school or to an
educational institution. The school offers two programs: general or
technical. At the end of the third year of secondary school, students
pass the exam of the baccalaureate, which allows once it is successful
to pursue graduate studies in universities and institutes.[190]

Education is officially compulsory for children between the ages of six
and 15. In 2008, the illiteracy rate for people over 10 was 22.3%, 15.6%
for men and 29.0% for women. The province with the lowest rate of
illiteracy was Algiers Province at 11.6%, while the province with the
highest rate was Djelfa Province at 35.5%.[191]

Algeria has 26 universities and 67 institutions of higher education,
which must accommodate a million Algerians and 80,000 foreign students
in 2008. The University of Algiers, founded in 1879, is the oldest, it
offers education in various disciplines (law, medicine, science and
letters). 25 of these universities and almost all of the institutions of
higher education were founded after the independence of the country.

Even if some of them offer instruction in Arabic like areas of law and
the economy, most of the other sectors as science and medicine continue
to be provided in French and English. Among the most important
universities, there are the University of Sciences and Technology Houari
Boumediene, the University of Mentouri Constantine, and University of
Oran Es-Senia. The University of Abou Bekr Belkaïd in Tlemcen and
University of Batna Hadj Lakhdar occupy the 26th and 45th row in
Africa.[192]


See also

-   Index of Algeria-related articles
-   Outline of Algeria
-


Notes


References


Bibliography

-   Ageron, Charles-Robert (1991). _Modern Algeria – A History from 1830
    to the Present_. Translated from French and edited by Michael Brett.
    London: Hurst. .
-   Aghrout, Ahmed; Bougherira, Redha M. (2004). _Algeria in
    Transition – Reforms and Development Prospects_. Routledge. .
-   Bennoune, Mahfoud (1988). _The Making of Contemporary Algeria –
    Colonial Upheavals and Post-Independence Development, 1830–1987_.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
-   Fanon, Frantz (1966; 2005 paperback). _The Wretched of the Earth_.
    Grove Press. ASIN B0007FW4AW, .
-   Horne, Alistair (1977). _A Savage War of Peace: Algeria 1954–1962_.
    Viking Adult. , (2006 reprint)
-   Laouisset, Djamel (2009). _A Retrospective Study of the Algerian
    Iron and Steel Industry_. New York City: Nova Publishers. .
-   Roberts, Hugh (2003). _The Battlefield – Algeria, 1988–2002. Studies
    in a Broken Polity_. London: Verso Books. .
-   Ruedy, John (1992). _Modern Algeria – The Origins and Development of
    a Nation_. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. .
-   Stora, Benjamin (2001). _Algeria, 1830–2000 – A Short History_.
    Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. .
-   Sidaoui, Riadh (2009). "Islamic Politics and the Military – Algeria
    1962–2008". _Religion and Politics – Islam and Muslim Civilisation_.
    Farnham: Ashgate Publishing. .


External links

-   People's Democratic Republic of Algeria _Official government
    website_ /
-   Portal of the First Ministry _Portal of the First Ministry_ /
-   -   -   -   Algeria profile from the BBC News
-   -   -   Key Development Forecasts for Algeria from International
    Futures
-   EU Neighbourhood Info Centre: Algeria

Algeria Category:North African countries Category:Maghrebi countries
Category:Saharan countries Category:Arab republics Category:Republics
Category:Arabic-speaking countries and territories
Category:Berber-speaking countries and territories
Category:French-speaking countries and territories Category:G15 nations
Category:Member states of OPEC Category:Member states of the African
Union Category:Member states of the Arab League Category:Member states
of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Category:Member states of the
Union for the Mediterranean Category:Member states of the United Nations
Category:Requests for audio pronunciation (Arabic) Category:Requests for
audio pronunciation (Berber) Category:States and territories established
in 1962 Category:1962 establishments in Algeria Category:1962
establishments in Africa Category:Countries in Africa

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6] al-Idrisi, Muhammad (12th century) _Nuzhat al-Mushtaq_

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18] Jonathan Conant, Staying Roman, 2012, pp. 364-365

[19] Jonathan Conant, Staying Roman, 2012, pp. 364-365

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25] The Great Mosque of Tlemcen, MuslimHeritage.com

[26] _Populations Crises and Population Cycles_ , Claire Russell and W.
M. S. Russell

[27]

[28] Hayreddin Barbarossa#Rulers of Algiers

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44] "Vísindavefurinn: Hverjir stóðu raunverulega að Tyrkjaráninu?" .
_Vísindavefurinn_.

[45] "Vísindavefurinn: Hvað gerðist í Tyrkjaráninu?" .
_Vísindavefurinn_.

[46] "Turkish invasion walk" . _heimaslod.is_.

[47] Etravel Travel service. "Turkish Invasion – Visit Westman Islands
.com" . _visitwestmanislands.com_.

[48] "Vísindavefurinn: Voru Tyrkjarán framin í öðrum löndum?" .
_Vísindavefurinn_.

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58] "Had planning been better (barracks, hospitals, medical services),
the drain on men would have been miniscule: it has been calculated that
between 1831 and 1851, 92,329 died in hospital, and only 3,336 in
battle." The Military and Colonial Destruction of the Roman Landscape of
North Africa ... - Michael Greenhalgh, p366 1

[59]

[60]

[61] Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Barbary Pirates ". Encyclopædia
Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68] Albert Habib Hourani, Malise Ruthven (2002). "_A history of the
Arab peoples_". Harvard University Press. p.323.

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77] "98 Die in One of Algerian Civil War's Worst Massacres ". _The New
York Times_. 30 August 1997.

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89] "Crocodiles in the Sahara Desert: An Update of Distribution,
Habitats and Population Status for Conservation Planning in Mauritania
". _PLOS ONE_. 25 February 2011.

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94] Articles: 85, 87, 77, 78 and 79 of the Algerian constitution

[95]

[96] Article 42 of the Algerian constitution –

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103] "Loi 14-06 relative au service national", JORADP 48, August, 10th
2014

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]  Le Matin d'Algérie|work=Le Matin d'Algérie|access-date=15 March
2018|language=fr|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20180315200412/http://www.lematindalgerie.com/le-snategs-denonce-et-decide-de-porter-plainte%7Carchive-date=15
March 2018|dead-url=no|df=dmy-all}}

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]

[138]

[139]

[140]

[141]

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

[147]

[148]

[149]

[150]

[151]

[152]

[153]

[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

[165]

[166]

[167]

[168]

[169]  () "L'Algérie, non-membre de l'Organisation internationale de la
Francophonie, comptabilise la seconde communauté francophone au monde,
avec environ 16 millions de locuteurs, suivie par la Côte d'Ivoire avec
près de 12 millions de locuteurs francophones, le Québec avec 6 millions
et la Belgique avec plus de 4 millions de francophones."

[170]  () p. 9 "Nous y agrégeons néanmoins quelques données disponibles
pour des pays n'appartenant pas à l'OIF mais dont nous savons, comme
pour l'Algérie (11,2 millions en 2008¹)," and "1. Nombre de personnes
âgées de cinq ans et plus déclarant savoir lire et écrire le français,
d'après les données du recensement de 2008 communiquées par l'Office
national des statistiques d'Algérie."

[171]

[172]

[173]

[174]

[175]

[176]

[177]

[178]

[179]

[180]

[181] Ali, Sahar (25 March 2014) ALGÉRIE . European Audiovisual
Observatory

[182]

[183]

[184]

[185]

[186]

[187]

[188]

[189]

[190]

[191]

[192]