In mathematics, particularly abstract algebra, an ALGEBRAIC CLOSURE of a field _K_ is an algebraic extension of _K_ that is algebraically closed. It is one of many closures in mathematics.

Using Zorn's lemma[1][2][3] or the weaker ultrafilter lemma,[4][5] it can be shown that every field has an algebraic closure, and that the algebraic closure of a field _K_ is unique up to an isomorphism that fixes every member of _K_. Because of this essential uniqueness, we often speak of _the_ algebraic closure of _K_, rather than _an_ algebraic closure of _K_.

The algebraic closure of a field _K_ can be thought of as the largest algebraic extension of _K_. To see this, note that if _L_ is any algebraic extension of _K_, then the algebraic closure of _L_ is also an algebraic closure of _K_, and so _L_ is contained within the algebraic closure of _K_. The algebraic closure of _K_ is also the smallest algebraically closed field containing _K_, because if _M_ is any algebraically closed field containing _K_, then the elements of _M_ that are algebraic over _K_ form an algebraic closure of _K_.

The algebraic closure of a field _K_ has the same cardinality as _K_ if _K_ is infinite, and is countably infinite if _K_ is finite.[6]


Examples

-   The fundamental theorem of algebra states that the algebraic closure of the field of real numbers is the field of complex numbers.
-   The algebraic closure of the field of rational numbers is the field of algebraic numbers.
-   There are many countable algebraically closed fields within the complex numbers, and strictly containing the field of algebraic numbers; these are the algebraic closures of transcendental extensions of the rational numbers, e.g. the algebraic closure of Q(π).
-   For a finite field of prime power order _q_, the algebraic closure is a countably infinite field that contains a copy of the field of order _q_^(_n_) for each positive integer _n_ (and is in fact the union of these copies).[7]


Existence of an algebraic closure and splitting fields

Let S = {f_(λ)|λ ∈ Λ} be the set of all monic irreducible polynomials in _K_[_x_]. For each f_(λ) ∈ S, introduce new variables u_(λ, 1), …, u_(λ, d) where $d = {\rm degree}(f_{\lambda})$. Let _R_ be the polynomial ring over _K_ generated by u_(λ, i) for all λ ∈ Λ and all $i \leq {\rm degree}(f_{\lambda})$. Write

    $f_{\lambda} - \prod_{i=1}^d (x-u_{\lambda,i}) = \sum_{j=0}^{d-1} r_{\lambda,j} \cdot x^j \in R[x]$

with r_(λ, j) ∈ R. Let _I_ be the ideal in _R_ generated by the r_(λ, j). Since _I_ is strictly smaller than _R_, Zorn's lemma implies that there exists a maximal ideal _M_ in _R_ that contains _I_. The field _K_₁=_R_/_M_ has the property that every polynomial f_(λ) with coefficients in _K_ splits as the product of x − (u_(λ, i) + M), and hence has all roots in _K_₁. In the same way, an extension _K_₂ of _K_₁ can be constructed, etc. The union of all these extensions is the algebraic closure of _K_, because any polynomial with coefficients in this new field has its coefficients in some _K__(n) with sufficiently large _n_, and then its roots are in _K__(n+1), and hence in the union itself.

It can be shown along the same lines that for any subset _S_ of _K_[_x_], there exists a splitting field of _S_ over _K_.


Separable closure

An algebraic closure _K^(alg)_ of _K_ contains a unique separable extension _K^(sep)_ of _K_ containing all (algebraic) separable extensions of _K_ within _K^(alg)_. This subextension is called a SEPARABLE CLOSURE of _K_. Since a separable extension of a separable extension is again separable, there are no finite separable extensions of _K^(sep)_, of degree > 1. Saying this another way, _K_ is contained in a _separably-closed_ algebraic extension field. It is unique (up to isomorphism).[8]

The separable closure is the full algebraic closure if and only if _K_ is a perfect field. For example, if _K_ is a field of characteristic _p_ and if _X_ is transcendental over _K_, $K(X)(\sqrt[p]{X}) \supset K(X)$ is a non-separable algebraic field extension.

In general, the absolute Galois group of _K_ is the Galois group of _K^(sep)_ over _K_.[9]


See also

-   Algebraically closed field
-   Algebraic extension
-   Puiseux expansion


References

-   -

Category:Field extensions

[1] McCarthy (1991) p.21

[2] M. F. Atiyah and I. G. Macdonald (1969). _Introduction to commutative algebra_. Addison-Wesley publishing Company. pp. 11–12.

[3] Kaplansky (1972) pp.74-76

[4]

[5] Mathoverflow discussion

[6]

[7] .

[8] McCarthy (1991) p.22

[9]