The ALKALI METALS are a group (column) in the periodic table consisting
of the chemical elements lithium (Li), sodium (Na), potassium (K),[1]
rubidium (Rb), caesium (Cs), and francium (Fr). This group lies in the
s-block of the periodic table of elements as all alkali metals have
their outermost electron in an s-orbital: this shared electron
configuration results in their having very similar characteristic
properties. Indeed, the alkali metals provide the best example of group
trends in properties in the periodic table, with elements exhibiting
well-characterised homologous behaviour.

The alkali metals are all shiny, soft, highly reactive metals at
standard temperature and pressure and readily lose their outermost
electron to form cations with charge +1. They can all be cut easily with
a knife due to their softness, exposing a shiny surface that tarnishes
rapidly in air due to oxidation by atmospheric moisture and oxygen (and
in the case of lithium, nitrogen). Because of their high reactivity,
they must be stored under oil to prevent reaction with air, and are
found naturally only in salts and never as the free elements. Caesium,
the fifth alkali metal, is the most reactive of all the metals. In the
modern IUPAC nomenclature, the alkali metals comprise the GROUP 1
ELEMENTS, excluding hydrogen (H), which is nominally a group 1 element
but not normally considered to be an alkali metal as it rarely exhibits
behaviour comparable to that of the alkali metals. All the alkali metals
react with water, with the heavier alkali metals reacting more
vigorously than the lighter ones.

All of the discovered alkali metals occur in nature as their compounds:
in order of abundance, sodium is the most abundant, followed by
potassium, lithium, rubidium, caesium, and finally francium, which is
very rare due to its extremely high radioactivity; francium occurs only
in the minutest traces in nature as an intermediate step in some obscure
side branches of the natural decay chains. Experiments have been
conducted to attempt the synthesis of ununennium (Uue), which is likely
to be the next member of the group, but they have all met with failure.
However, ununennium may not be an alkali metal due to relativistic
effects, which are predicted to have a large influence on the chemical
properties of superheavy elements; even if it does turn out to be an
alkali metal, it is predicted to have some differences in physical and
chemical properties from its lighter homologues.

Most alkali metals have many different applications. One of the
best-known applications of the pure elements is the use of rubidium and
caesium in atomic clocks, of which caesium atomic clocks form the basis
of the second. A common application of the compounds of sodium is the
sodium-vapour lamp, which emits light very efficiently. Table salt, or
sodium chloride, has been used since antiquity. Lithium finds use as a
psychiatric medication and as an anode in lithium batteries. Sodium and
potassium are also essential elements, having major biological roles as
electrolytes, and although the other alkali metals are not essential,
they also have various effects on the body, both beneficial and harmful.
__TOC__


History

Petalite.jpg, the lithium mineral from which lithium was first
isolated]] Sodium compounds have been known since ancient times; salt
(sodium chloride) has been an important commodity in human activities,
as testified by the English word _salary_, referring to _salarium_,
money paid to Roman soldiers for the purchase of salt.[2] While potash
has been used since ancient times, it was not understood for most of its
history to be a fundamentally different substance from sodium mineral
salts. Georg Ernst Stahl obtained experimental evidence which led him to
suggest the fundamental difference of sodium and potassium salts in
1702,[3] and Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau was able to prove this
difference in 1736.[4] The exact chemical composition of potassium and
sodium compounds, and the status as chemical element of potassium and
sodium, was not known then, and thus Antoine Lavoisier did not include
either alkali in his list of chemical elements in 1789.[5][6]

Pure potassium was first isolated in 1807 in England by Sir Humphry
Davy, who derived it from caustic potash (KOH, potassium hydroxide) by
the use of electrolysis of the molten salt with the newly invented
voltaic pile. Previous attempts at electrolysis of the aqueous salt were
unsuccessful due to potassium's extreme reactivity.[7] Potassium was the
first metal that was isolated by electrolysis.[8] Later that same year,
Davy reported extraction of sodium from the similar substance caustic
soda (NaOH, lye) by a similar technique, demonstrating the elements, and
thus the salts, to be different.[9][10][11][12]

Johann_Wolfgang_Döbereiner.jpg was among the first to notice
similarities between what are now known as the alkali metals.]] Petalite
(Li Al Si₄O₁₀) was discovered in 1800 by the Brazilian chemist José
Bonifácio de Andrada in a mine on the island of Utö, Sweden.[13][14][15]
However, it was not until 1817 that Johan August Arfwedson, then working
in the laboratory of the chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius, detected the
presence of a new element while analysing petalite ore.[16][17] This new
element was noted by him to form compounds similar to those of sodium
and potassium, though its carbonate and hydroxide were less soluble in
water and more alkaline than the other alkali metals.[18] Berzelius gave
the unknown material the name "_lithion_/_lithina_", from the Greek word
_λιθoς_ (transliterated as _lithos_, meaning "stone"), to reflect its
discovery in a solid mineral, as opposed to potassium, which had been
discovered in plant ashes, and sodium, which was known partly for its
high abundance in animal blood. He named the metal inside the material
"_lithium_".[19][20][21] Lithium, sodium, and potassium were part of the
discovery of periodicity, as they are among a series of triads of
elements in the same group that were noted by Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner
in 1850 as having similar properties.[22]

Lepidolite-76774.jpg, the rubidium mineral from which rubidium was first
isolated]] Rubidium and caesium were the first elements to be discovered
using the spectroscope, invented in 1859 by Robert Bunsen and Gustav
Kirchhoff.[23] The next year, they discovered caesium in the mineral
water from Bad Dürkheim, Germany. Their discovery of rubidium came the
following year in Heidelberg, Germany, finding it in the mineral
lepidolite.[24] The names of rubidium and caesium come from the most
prominent lines in their emission spectra: a bright red line for
rubidium (from the Latin word _rubidus_, meaning dark red or bright
red), and a sky-blue line for caesium (derived from the Latin word
_caesius_, meaning sky-blue).[25][26]

Around 1865 John Newlands produced a series of papers where he listed
the elements in order of increasing atomic weight and similar physical
and chemical properties that recurred at intervals of eight; he likened
such periodicity to the octaves of music, where notes an octave apart
have similar musical functions.[27][28] His version put all the alkali
metals then known (lithium to caesium), as well as copper, silver, and
thallium (which show the +1 oxidation state characteristic of the alkali
metals), together into a group. His table placed hydrogen with the
halogens.[29]

Mendelejevs_periodiska_system_1871.png's periodic system proposed in
1871 showing hydrogen and the alkali metals as part of his group I,
along with copper, silver, and gold]] After 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev
proposed his periodic table placing lithium at the top of a group with
sodium, potassium, rubidium, caesium, and thallium.[30] Two years later,
Mendeleev revised his table, placing hydrogen in group 1 above lithium,
and also moving thallium to the boron group. In this 1871 version,
copper, silver, and gold were placed twice, once as part of group IB,
and once as part of a "group VIII" encompassing today's groups 8 to
11.[31][32] After the introduction of the 18-column table, the group IB
elements were moved to their current position in the d-block, while
alkali metals were left in _group IA_. Later the group's name was
changed to _group 1_ in 1988.[33] The trivial name "alkali metals" comes
from the fact that the hydroxides of the group 1 elements are all strong
alkalis when dissolved in water.[34]

There were at least four erroneous and incomplete
discoveries[35][36][37][38] before Marguerite Perey of the Curie
Institute in Paris, France discovered francium in 1939 by purifying a
sample of actinium-227, which had been reported to have a decay energy
of 220 keV. However, Perey noticed decay particles with an energy level
below 80 keV. Perey thought this decay activity might have been caused
by a previously unidentified decay product, one that was separated
during purification, but emerged again out of the pure actinium-227.
Various tests eliminated the possibility of the unknown element being
thorium, radium, lead, bismuth, or thallium. The new product exhibited
chemical properties of an alkali metal (such as coprecipitating with
caesium salts), which led Perey to believe that it was element 87,
caused by the alpha decay of actinium-227.[39] Perey then attempted to
determine the proportion of beta decay to alpha decay in actinium-227.
Her first test put the alpha branching at 0.6%, a figure that she later
revised to 1%.[40]



The next element below francium (eka-francium) in the periodic table
would be ununennium (Uue), element 119.[41] The synthesis of ununennium
was first attempted in 1985 by bombarding a target of einsteinium-254
with calcium-48 ions at the superHILAC accelerator at Berkeley,
California. No atoms were identified, leading to a limiting yield of 300
nb.[42][43]

    + → * → _no atoms_[44]

It is highly unlikely[45] that this reaction will be able to create any
atoms of ununennium in the near future, given the extremely difficult
task of making sufficient amounts of einsteinium-254, which is favoured
for production of ultraheavy elements because of its large mass,
relatively long half-life of 270 days, and availability in significant
amounts of several micrograms,[46] to make a large enough target to
increase the sensitivity of the experiment to the required level;
einsteinium has not been found in nature and has only been produced in
laboratories, and in quantities smaller than those needed for effective
synthesis of superheavy elements. However, given that ununennium is only
the first period 8 element on the extended periodic table, it may well
be discovered in the near future through other reactions, and indeed an
attempt to synthesise it is currently ongoing in Japan.[47] Currently,
none of the period 8 elements have been discovered yet, and it is also
possible, due to drip instabilities, that only the lower period 8
elements, up to around element 128, are physically possible.[48][49] No
attempts at synthesis have been made for any heavier alkali metals: due
to their extremely high atomic number, they would require new, more
powerful methods and technology to make.[50]


Occurrence

In the Solar System

SolarSystemAbundances.png. The next three elements (lithium, beryllium,
and boron) are rare because they are poorly synthesised in the Big Bang
and also in stars. The two general trends in the remaining
stellar-produced elements are: (1) an alternation of abundance in
elements as they have even or odd atomic numbers, and (2) a general
decrease in abundance, as elements become heavier. Iron is especially
common because it represents the minimum energy nuclide that can be made
by fusion of helium in supernovae.[51]]] The Oddo–Harkins rule holds
that elements with even atomic numbers are more common that those with
odd atomic numbers, with the exception of hydrogen. This rule argues
that elements with odd atomic numbers have one unpaired proton and are
more likely to capture another, thus increasing their atomic number. In
elements with even atomic numbers, protons are paired, with each member
of the pair offsetting the spin of the other, enhancing
stability.[52][53][54] All the alkali metals have odd atomic numbers and
they are not as common as the elements with even atomic numbers adjacent
to them (the noble gases and the alkaline earth metals) in the Solar
System. The heavier alkali metals are also less abundant than the
lighter ones as the alkali metals from rubidium onward can only be
synthesised in supernovae and not in stellar nucleosynthesis. Lithium is
also much less abundant than sodium and potassium as it is poorly
synthesised in both Big Bang nucleosynthesis and in stars: the Big Bang
could only produce trace quantities of lithium, beryllium and boron due
to the absence of a stable nucleus with 5 or 8 nucleons, and stellar
nucleosynthesis could only pass this bottleneck by the triple-alpha
process, fusing three helium nuclei to form carbon, and skipping over
those three elements.[55]

On Earth

Spodumene-usa59abg.jpg, an important lithium mineral]] The Earth formed
from the same cloud of matter that formed the Sun, but the planets
acquired different compositions during the formation and evolution of
the solar system. In turn, the natural history of the Earth caused parts
of this planet to have differing concentrations of the elements. The
mass of the Earth is approximately 5.98 kg. It is composed mostly of
iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur
(2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%); with the
remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements. Due to
planetary differentiation, the core region is believed to be primarily
composed of iron (88.8%), with smaller amounts of nickel (5.8%), sulfur
(4.5%), and less than 1% trace elements.[56]

The alkali metals, due to their high reactivity, do not occur naturally
in pure form in nature. They are lithophiles and therefore remain close
to the Earth's surface because they combine readily with oxygen and so
associate strongly with silica, forming relatively low-density minerals
that do not sink down into the Earth's core. Potassium, rubidium and
caesium are also incompatible elements due to their large ionic
radii.[57]

Sodium and potassium are very abundant in earth, both being among the
ten most common elements in Earth's crust;[58][59] sodium makes up
approximately 2.6% of the Earth's crust measured by weight, making it
the sixth most abundant element overall[60] and the most abundant alkali
metal. Potassium makes up approximately 1.5% of the Earth's crust and is
the seventh most abundant element.[61] Sodium is found in many different
minerals, of which the most common is ordinary salt (sodium chloride),
which occurs in vast quantities dissolved in seawater. Other solid
deposits include halite, amphibole, cryolite, nitratine, and
zeolite.[62] Many of these solid deposits occur as a result of ancient
seas evaporating, which still occurs now in places such as Utah's Great
Salt Lake and the Dead Sea.[63] Despite their near-equal abundance in
Earth's crust, sodium is far more common than potassium in the ocean,
both because potassium's larger size makes its salts less soluble, and
because potassium is bound by silicates in soil and what potassium
leaches is absorbed far more readily by plant life than sodium.[64]

Despite its chemical similarity, lithium typically does not occur
together with sodium or potassium due to its smaller size.[65] Due to
its relatively low reactivity, it can be found in seawater in large
amounts; it is estimated that seawater is approximately 0.14 to 0.25
parts per million (ppm)[66][67] or 25 micromolar.[68] Its diagonal
relationship with magnesium often allows it to replace magnesium in
ferromagnesium minerals, where its crustal concentration is about
18 ppm, comparable to that of gallium and niobium. Commercially, the
most important lithium mineral is spodumene, which occurs in large
deposits worldwide.[69]

Rubidium is approximately as abundant as zinc and more abundant than
copper. It occurs naturally in the minerals leucite, pollucite,
carnallite, zinnwaldite, and lepidolite,[70] although none of these
contain only rubidium and no other alkali metals.[71] Caesium is more
abundant than some commonly known elements, such as antimony, cadmium,
tin, and tungsten, but is much less abundant than rubidium.[72]

Francium-223, the only naturally occurring isotope of francium,[73][74]
is the product of the alpha decay of actinium-227 and can be found in
trace amounts in uranium minerals.[75] In a given sample of uranium,
there is estimated to be only one francium atom for every 10¹⁸ uranium
atoms.[76][77] It has been calculated that there is at most 30 g of
francium in the earth's crust at any time, due to its extremely short
half-life of 22 minutes.[78][79]


Properties

Physical and chemical

The physical and chemical properties of the alkali metals can be readily
explained by their having an ns¹ valence electron configuration, which
results in weak metallic bonding. Hence, all the alkali metals are soft
and have low densities,[80] melting[81] and boiling points,[82] as well
as heats of sublimation, vaporisation, and dissociation.[83] They all
crystallise in the body-centered cubic crystal structure,[84] and have
distinctive flame colours because their outer s electron is very easily
excited.[85] The ns¹ configuration also results in the alkali metals
having very large atomic and ionic radii, as well as very high thermal
and electrical conductivity.[86] Their chemistry is dominated by the
loss of their lone valence electron in the outermost s-orbital to form
the +1 oxidation state, due to the ease of ionising this electron and
the very high second ionisation energy.[87] Most of the chemistry has
been observed only for the first five members of the group. The
chemistry of francium is not well established due to its extreme
radioactivity;[88] thus, the presentation of its properties here is
limited. What little is known about francium shows that it is very close
in behaviour to caesium, as expected. The physical properties of
francium are even sketchier because the bulk element has never been
observed; hence any data that may be found in the literature are
certainly speculative extrapolations.[89]

+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Name    | Lithium | Sodium  | Potassi | Rubidiu | Caesium | Franciu |
|         |         |         | um      | m       |         | m       |
+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
| Atomic  | 3       | 11      | 19      | 37      | 55      | 87      |
| number  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Standar | 6.94(1) | 22.9897 | 39.0983 | 85.4678 | 132.905 | [223]   |
| d       |         | 6928(2) | (1)     | (3)     | 4519(2) |         |
| atomic  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| weight  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (u)[96] |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| [97]    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Electro | He] 2s¹ | Ne] 3s¹ | Ar] 4s¹ | Kr] 5s¹ | Xe] 6s¹ | Rn] 7s¹ |
| n       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| configu |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ration  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Melting | 180.54  | 97.72   | 63.38   | 39.31   | 28.44   | ?       |
| point   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (°C)    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Boiling | 1342    | 883     | 759     | 688     | 671     | ?       |
| point   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (°C)    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Density | 0.534   | 0.968   | 0.89    | 1.532   | 1.93    | ?       |
|  (g·cm^ |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (−3))   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Heat of | 3.00    | 2.60    | 2.321   | 2.19    | 2.09    | ?       |
| fusion  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (kJ·mol |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ^(−1))  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Heat of | 136     | 97.42   | 79.1    | 69      | 66.1    | ?       |
| vaporis |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ation ( |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| kJ·mol^ |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (−1))   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Heat of | 162     | 108     | 89.6    | 82.0    | 78.2    | ?       |
| formati |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| on of m |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| onatomi |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| c gas ( |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| kJ·mol^ |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (−1))   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Electri | 94.7    | 48.8    | 73.9    | 131     | 208     | ?       |
| cal     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| resisti |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| vity at |         |         |         |         |         |         |
|  25 °C  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (nΩ·cm) |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Atomic  | 152     | 186     | 227     | 248     | 265     | ?       |
| radius  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (pm)    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Ionic   | 76      | 102     | 138     | 152     | 167     | ?       |
| radius  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| of      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| hexacoo |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| rdinate |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| M⁺      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ion (pm |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| )       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| First   | 520.2   | 495.8   | 418.8   | 403.0   | 375.7   | 392.8[9 |
| ionisat |         |         |         |         |         | 8]      |
| ion     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| energy  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (kJ·mol |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ^(−1))  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Electro | 59.62   | 52.87   | 48.38   | 46.89   | 45.51   | ?       |
| n       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| affinit |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| y (kJ·m |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ol^(−1) |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| )       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Enthalp | 106.5   | 73.6    | 57.3    | 45.6    | 44.77   | ?       |
| y       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| of      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| dissoci |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ation o |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| f M₂ (k |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| J·mol^( |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| −1))    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Pauling | 0.98    | 0.93    | 0.82    | 0.82    | 0.79    | ?       |
| electro |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| negativ |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ity     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Standar | −3.04   | −2.71   | −2.93   | −2.98   | −3.03   | ?       |
| d       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| electro |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| de      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| potenti |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| al      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| (_E_°(M |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ⁺→M⁰);  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| V)[99]  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Flame   | Crimson | Yellow  | Violet  | Red-vio | Blue    | ?       |
| test    | 670.8   | 589.2   | 766.5   | let     | 455.5   |         |
| colour  |         |         |         | 780.0   |         |         |
| Princip |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| al      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| emissio |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| n/absor |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| ption   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| wavelen |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| gth (nm |         |         |         |         |         |         |
| )       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

: Properties of the alkali metals[90][91]

The alkali metals are more similar to each other than the elements in
any other group are to each other.[100] Indeed, the similarity is so
great that it is quite difficult to separate potassium, rubidium, and
caesium, due to their similar ionic radii; lithium and sodium are more
distinct. For instance, when moving down the table, all known alkali
metals show increasing atomic radius,[101] decreasing
electronegativity,[102] increasing reactivity,[103] and decreasing
melting and boiling points[104] as well as heats of fusion and
vaporisation.[105] In general, their densities increase when moving down
the table, with the exception that potassium is less dense than
sodium.[106] One of the very few properties of the alkali metals that
does not display a very smooth trend is their reduction potentials:
lithium's value is anomalous, being more negative than the others.[107]
This is because the Li⁺ ion has a very high hydration energy in the gas
phase: though the lithium ion disrupts the structure of water
significantly, causing a higher change in entropy, this high hydration
energy is enough to make the reduction potentials indicate it as being
the most electropositive alkali metal, despite the difficulty of
ionising it in the gas phase.[108]

The stable alkali metals are all silver-coloured metals except for
caesium, which has a pale golden tint:[109] it is one of only three
metals that are clearly coloured (the other two being copper and
gold).[110] Additionally, the heavy alkaline earth metals calcium,
strontium, and barium, as well as the divalent lanthanides europium and
ytterbium, are pale yellow, though the colour is much less prominent
than it is for caesium.[111] Their lustre tarnishes rapidly in air due
to oxidation.[112] They all crystallise in the body-centered cubic
crystal structure,[113] and have distinctive flame colours because their
outer s electron is very easily excited. Indeed, these flame test
colours are the most common way of identifying them since all their
salts with common ions are soluble.[114]

Potassium_water_20.theora.ogv Cesium_water.theora.ogv All the alkali
metals are highly reactive and are never found in elemental forms in
nature.[115] Because of this, they are usually stored in mineral oil or
kerosene (paraffin oil).[116] They react aggressively with the halogens
to form the alkali metal halides, which are white ionic crystalline
compounds that are all soluble in water except lithium fluoride (Li
F).[117] The alkali metals also react with water to form strongly
alkaline hydroxides and thus should be handled with great care. The
heavier alkali metals react more vigorously than the lighter ones; for
example, when dropped into water, caesium produces a larger explosion
than potassium if the same number of moles of each metal is
used.[118][119][120] The alkali metals have the lowest first ionisation
energies in their respective periods of the periodic table[121] because
of their low effective nuclear charge[122] and the ability to attain a
noble gas configuration by losing just one electron.[123] Not only do
the alkali metals react with water, but also with proton donors like
alcohols and phenols, gaseous ammonia, and alkynes, the last
demonstrating the phenomenal degree of their reactivity. Their great
power as reducing agents makes them very useful in liberating other
metals from their oxides or halides.[124]

The second ionisation energy of all of the alkali metals is very
high[125][126] as it is in a full shell that is also closer to the
nucleus;[127] thus, they almost always lose a single electron, forming
cations.[128] The alkalides are an exception: they are unstable
compounds which contain alkali metals in a −1 oxidation state, which is
very unusual as before the discovery of the alkalides, the alkali metals
were not expected to be able to form anions and were thought to be able
to appear in salts only as cations. The alkalide anions have filled
s-subshells, which gives them enough stability to exist. All the stable
alkali metals except lithium are known to be able to form
alkalides,[129][130][131] and the alkalides have much theoretical
interest due to their unusual stoichiometry and low ionisation
potentials. Alkalides are chemically similar to the electrides, which
are salts with trapped electrons acting as anions.[132] A particularly
striking example of an alkalide is "inverse sodium hydride", H⁺Na^(−)
(both ions being complexed), as opposed to the usual sodium hydride,
Na⁺H^(−):[133] it is unstable in isolation, due to its high energy
resulting from the displacement of two electrons from hydrogen to
sodium, although several derivatives are predicted to be metastable or
stable.[134][135]

In aqueous solution, the alkali metal ions form aqua ions of the formula
[M(H₂O)_(_n_)]⁺, where _n_ is the solvation number. Their coordination
numbers and shapes agree well with those expected from their ionic
radii. In aqueous solution the water molecules directly attached to the
metal ion are said to belong to the first coordination sphere, also
known as the first, or primary, solvation shell. The bond between a
water molecule and the metal ion is a dative covalent bond, with the
oxygen atom donating both electrons to the bond. Each coordinated water
molecule may be attached by hydrogen bonds to other water molecules. The
latter are said to reside in the second coordination sphere. However,
for the alkali metal cations, the second coordination sphere is not
well-defined as the +1 charge on the cation is not high enough to
polarise the water molecules in the primary solvation shell enough for
them to form strong hydrogen bonds with those in the second coordination
sphere, producing a more stable entity.[136][137] The solvation number
for Li⁺ has been experimentally determined to be 4, forming the
tetrahedral [Li(H₂O)₄]⁺: while solvation numbers of 3 to 6 have been
found for lithium aqua ions, solvation numbers less than 4 may be the
result of the formation of contact ion pairs, and the higher solvation
numbers may be interpreted in terms of water molecules that approach
[Li(H₂O)₄]⁺ through a face of the tetrahedron, though molecular dynamic
simulations may indicate the existence of an octahedral hexaaqua ion.
There are also probably six water molecules in the primary solvation
sphere of the sodium ion, forming the octahedral [Na(H₂O)₆]⁺
ion.[138][139] While it was previously thought that the heavier alkali
metals also formed octahedral hexaaqua ions, it has since been found
that potassium and rubidium probably form the [K(H₂O)₈]⁺ and [Rb(H₂O)₈]⁺
ions, which have the square antiprismatic structure, and that caesium
forms the 12-coordinate [Cs(H₂O)₁₂]⁺ ion.[140]

Lithium

The chemistry of lithium shows several differences from that of the rest
of the group as the small Li⁺ cation polarises anions and gives its
compounds a more covalent character.[141] Lithium and magnesium have a
diagonal relationship due to their similar atomic radii,[142] so that
they show some similarities. For example, lithium forms a stable
nitride, a property common among all the alkaline earth metals
(magnesium's group) but unique among the alkali metals.[143] In
addition, among their respective groups, only lithium and magnesium form
organometallic compounds with significant covalent character (e.g. LiMe
and MgMe₂).[144]

Lithium fluoride is the only alkali metal halide that is poorly soluble
in water,[145] and lithium hydroxide is the only alkali metal hydroxide
that is not deliquescent.[146] Conversely, lithium perchlorate and other
lithium salts with large anions that cannot be polarised are much more
stable than the analogous compounds of the other alkali metals, probably
because Li⁺ has a high solvation energy.[147] This effect also means
that most simple lithium salts are commonly encountered in hydrated
form, because the anhydrous forms are extremely hygroscopic: this allows
salts like lithium chloride and lithium bromide to be used in
dehumidifiers and air-conditioners.[148]

Francium

Francium is also predicted to show some differences due to its high
atomic weight, causing its electrons to travel at considerable fractions
of the speed of light and thus making relativistic effects more
prominent. In contrast to the trend of decreasing electronegativities
and ionisation energies of the alkali metals, francium's
electronegativity and ionisation energy are predicted to be higher than
caesium's due to the relativistic stabilisation of the 7s electrons;
also, its atomic radius is expected to be abnormally low. Thus, contrary
to expectation, caesium is the most reactive of the alkali metals, not
francium.[149][150][151] All known physical properties of francium also
deviate from the clear trends going from lithium to caesium, such as the
first ionisation energy, electron affinity, and anion polarisability,
though due to the paucity of known data about francium many sources give
extrapolated values, ignoring that relativistic effects make the trend
from lithium to caesium become inapplicable at francium.[152] Some of
the few properties of francium that have been predicted taking
relativity into account are the electron affinity (47.2 kJ/mol)[153] and
the enthalpy of dissociation of the Fr₂ molecule (42.1 kJ/mol).[154] The
CsFr molecule is polarised as Cs⁺Fr^(−), showing that the 7s subshell of
francium is much more strongly affected by relativistic effects than the
6s subshell of caesium.[155] Additionally, francium superoxide (FrO₂) is
expected to have significant covalent character, unlike the other alkali
metal superoxides, because of bonding contributions from the 6p
electrons of francium.[156]

Nuclear

+--------------+--------------+--------+----------+--------------------------------+
| Z            | Alkali metal | Stable | _Decays_ | _unstable: italics_            |
|              |              |        |          |                                |
|              |              |        |          | odd–odd isotopes coloured pink |

+==============+==============+========+==========+================================+
| 3            | lithium      | 2      | —        |                                |
+--------------+--------------+--------+----------+--------------------------------+
| 11           | sodium       | 1      | —        |                                |
+--------------+--------------+--------+----------+--------------------------------+
| 19           | potassium    | 2      | 1        |                                |
+--------------+--------------+--------+----------+--------------------------------+
| 37           | rubidium     | 1      | 1        |                                |
+--------------+--------------+--------+----------+--------------------------------+
| 55           | caesium      | 1      | —        |                                |
+--------------+--------------+--------+----------+--------------------------------+
| 87           | francium     | —      | —        | _No primordial isotopes_       |
|              |              |        |          | (__ is a radiogenic nuclide)   |
+--------------+--------------+--------+----------+--------------------------------+
| Radioactive: |              |        |          |                                |
+--------------+--------------+--------+----------+--------------------------------+

: Primordial isotopes of the alkali metals

All the alkali metals have odd atomic numbers; hence, their isotopes
must be either odd–odd (both proton and neutron number are odd) or
odd–even (proton number is odd, but neutron number is even). Odd–odd
nuclei have even mass numbers, whereas odd–even nuclei have odd mass
numbers. Odd–odd primordial nuclides are rare because most odd–odd
nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay, because the decay
products are even–even, and are therefore more strongly bound, due to
nuclear pairing effects.[157]

Due to the great rarity of odd–odd nuclei, almost all the primordial
isotopes of the alkali metals are odd–even (the exceptions being the
light stable isotope lithium-6 and the long-lived radioisotope
potassium-40). For a given odd mass number, there can be only a single
beta-stable nuclide, since there is not a difference in binding energy
between even–odd and odd–even comparable to that between even–even and
odd–odd, leaving other nuclides of the same mass number (isobars) free
to beta decay toward the lowest-mass nuclide. An effect of the
instability of an odd number of either type of nucleons is that
odd-numbered elements, such as the alkali metals, tend to have fewer
stable isotopes than even-numbered elements. Of the 26 monoisotopic
elements that have only a single stable isotope, all but one have an odd
atomic number and all but one also have an even number of neutrons.
Beryllium is the single exception to both rules, due to its low atomic
number.[158]

All of the alkali metals except lithium and caesium have at least one
naturally occurring radioisotope: sodium-22 and sodium-24 are trace
radioisotopes produced cosmogenically,[159] potassium-40 and rubidium-87
have very long half-lives and thus occur naturally,[160] and all
isotopes of francium are radioactive.[161] Caesium was also thought to
be radioactive in the early 20th century,[162][163] although it has no
naturally occurring radioisotopes.[164] (Francium had not been
discovered yet at that time.) The natural long-lived radioisotope of
potassium, potassium-40, makes up about 0.012% of natural
potassium,[165] and thus natural potassium is weakly radioactive. This
natural radioactivity became a basis for a mistaken claim of the
discovery for element 87 (the next alkali metal after caesium) in
1925.[166][167] Natural rubidium is similarly slightly radioactive, with
27.83% being the long-lived radioisotope rubidium-87.[168]

Caesium-137, with a half-life of 30.17 years, is one of the two
principal medium-lived fission products, along with strontium-90, which
are responsible for most of the radioactivity of spent nuclear fuel
after several years of cooling, up to several hundred years after use.
It constitutes most of the radioactivity still left from the Chernobyl
accident. Caesium-137 undergoes high-energy beta decay and eventually
becomes stable barium-137. It is a strong emitter of gamma radiation.
Caesium-137 has a very low rate of neutron capture and cannot be
feasibly disposed of in this way, but must be allowed to decay.[169]
Caesium-137 has been used as a tracer in hydrologic studies, analogous
to the use of tritium.[170] Small amounts of caesium-134 and caesium-137
were released into the environment during nearly all nuclear weapon
tests and some nuclear accidents, most notably the Goiânia accident and
the Chernobyl disaster. As of 2005, caesium-137 is the principal source
of radiation in the zone of alienation around the Chernobyl nuclear
power plant.[171] Its chemical properties as one of the alkali metals
make it one of most problematic of the short-to-medium-lifetime fission
products because it easily moves and spreads in nature due to the high
water solubility of its salts, and is taken up by the body, which
mistakes it for its essential congeners sodium and potassium.[172]


Periodic trends

The alkali metals are more similar to each other than the elements in
any other group are to each other.[173] For instance, when moving down
the table, all known alkali metals show increasing atomic radius,[174]
decreasing electronegativity,[175] increasing reactivity,[176] and
decreasing melting and boiling points[177] as well as heats of fusion
and vaporisation.[178] In general, their densities increase when moving
down the table, with the exception that potassium is less dense than
sodium.[179]

Atomic and ionic radii

Effective_Nuclear_Charge.svg on an atomic electron]] The atomic radii of
the alkali metals increase going down the group.[180] Because of the
shielding effect, when an atom has more than one electron shell, each
electron feels electric repulsion from the other electrons as well as
electric attraction from the nucleus.[181] In the alkali metals, the
outermost electron only feels a net charge of +1, as some of the nuclear
charge (which is equal to the atomic number) is cancelled by the inner
electrons; the number of inner electrons of an alkali metal is always
one less than the nuclear charge. Therefore, the only factor which
affects the atomic radius of the alkali metals is the number of electron
shells. Since this number increases down the group, the atomic radius
must also increase down the group.[182]

The ionic radii of the alkali metals are much smaller than their atomic
radii. This is because the outermost electron of the alkali metals is in
a different electron shell than the inner electrons, and thus when it is
removed the resulting atom has one fewer electron shell and is smaller.
Additionally, the effective nuclear charge has increased, and thus the
electrons are attracted more strongly towards the nucleus and the ionic
radius decreases.[183]

First ionisation energy

First_Ionization_Energy.svges.]] The first ionisation energy of an
element or molecule is the energy required to move the most loosely held
electron from one mole of gaseous atoms of the element or molecules to
form one mole of gaseous ions with electric charge +1. The factors
affecting the first ionisation energy are the nuclear charge, the amount
of shielding by the inner electrons and the distance from the most
loosely held electron from the nucleus, which is always an outer
electron in main group elements. The first two factors change the
effective nuclear charge the most loosely held electron feels. Since the
outermost electron of alkali metals always feels the same effective
nuclear charge (+1), the only factor which affects the first ionisation
energy is the distance from the outermost electron to the nucleus. Since
this distance increases down the group, the outermost electron feels
less attraction from the nucleus and thus the first ionisation energy
decreases.[184] (This trend is broken in francium due to the
relativistic stabilisation and contraction of the 7s orbital, bringing
francium's valence electron closer to the nucleus than would be expected
from non-relativistic calculations. This makes francium's outermost
electron feel more attraction from the nucleus, increasing its first
ionisation energy slightly beyond that of caesium.)[185]

The second ionisation energy of the alkali metals is much higher than
the first as the second-most loosely held electron is part of a fully
filled electron shell and is thus difficult to remove.[186]

Reactivity

The reactivities of the alkali metals increase going down the group.
This is the result of a combination of two factors: the first ionisation
energies and atomisation energies of the alkali metals. Because the
first ionisation energy of the alkali metals decreases down the group,
it is easier for the outermost electron to be removed from the atom and
participate in chemical reactions, thus increasing reactivity down the
group. The atomisation energy measures the strength of the metallic bond
of an element, which falls down the group as the atoms increase in
radius and thus the metallic bond must increase in length, making the
delocalised electrons further away from the attraction of the nuclei of
the heavier alkali metals. Adding the atomisation and first ionisation
energies gives a quantity closely related to (but not equal to) the
activation energy of the reaction of an alkali metal with another
substance. This quantity decreases going down the group, and so does the
activation energy; thus, chemical reactions can occur faster and the
reactivity increases down the group.[187]

Electronegativity

Periodic_variation_of_Pauling_electronegativities.png of the periodic
table from the second to the sixth period]] Electronegativity is a
chemical property that describes the tendency of an atom or a functional
group to attract electrons (or electron density) towards itself.[188] If
the bond between sodium and chlorine in sodium chloride were covalent,
the pair of shared electrons would be attracted to the chlorine because
the effective nuclear charge on the outer electrons is +7 in chlorine
but is only +1 in sodium. The electron pair is attracted so close to the
chlorine atom that they are practically transferred to the chlorine atom
(an ionic bond). However, if the sodium atom was replaced by a lithium
atom, the electrons will not be attracted as close to the chlorine atom
as before because the lithium atom is smaller, making the electron pair
more strongly attracted to the closer effective nuclear charge from
lithium. Hence, the larger alkali metal atoms (further down the group)
will be less electronegative as the bonding pair is less strongly
attracted towards them. As mentioned previously, francium is expected to
be an exception.[189]

Because of the higher electronegativity of lithium, some of its
compounds have a more covalent character. For example, lithium iodide
(Li I) will dissolve in organic solvents, a property of most covalent
compounds.[190] Lithium fluoride (LiF) is the only alkali halide that is
not soluble in water,[191] and lithium hydroxide (LiOH) is the only
alkali metal hydroxide that is not deliquescent.[192]

Melting and boiling points

The melting point of a substance is the point where it changes state
from solid to liquid while the boiling point of a substance (in liquid
state) is the point where the vapour pressure of the liquid equals the
environmental pressure surrounding the liquid[193][194] and all the
liquid changes state to gas. As a metal is heated to its melting point,
the metallic bonds keeping the atoms in place weaken so that the atoms
can move around, and the metallic bonds eventually break completely at
the metal's boiling point.[195][196] Therefore, the falling melting and
boiling points of the alkali metals indicate that the strength of the
metallic bonds of the alkali metals decreases down the group.[197] This
is because metal atoms are held together by the electromagnetic
attraction from the positive ions to the delocalised
electrons.[198][199] As the atoms increase in size going down the group
(because their atomic radius increases), the nuclei of the ions move
further away from the delocalised electrons and hence the metallic bond
becomes weaker so that the metal can more easily melt and boil, thus
lowering the melting and boiling points.[200] (The increased nuclear
charge is not a relevant factor due to the shielding effect.)[201]

Density

The alkali metals all have the same crystal structure (body-centred
cubic)[202] and thus the only relevant factors are the number of atoms
that can fit into a certain volume and the mass of one of the atoms,
since density is defined as mass per unit volume. The first factor
depends on the volume of the atom and thus the atomic radius, which
increases going down the group; thus, the volume of an alkali metal atom
increases going down the group. The mass of an alkali metal atom also
increases going down the group. Thus, the trend for the densities of the
alkali metals depends on their atomic weights and atomic radii; if
figures for these two factors are known, the ratios between the
densities of the alkali metals can then be calculated. The resultant
trend is that the densities of the alkali metals increase down the
table, with an exception at potassium. Due to having the lowest atomic
weight and the largest atomic radius of all the elements in their
periods, the alkali metals are the least dense metals in the periodic
table.[203] Lithium, sodium, and potassium are the only three metals in
the periodic table that are less dense than water:[204] in fact, lithium
is the least dense known solid at room temperature.[205]


Compounds

The alkali metals form complete series of compounds with all usually
encountered anions, which well illustrate group trends. These compounds
can be described as involving the alkali metals losing electrons to
acceptor species and forming monopositive ions.[206] This description is
most accurate for alkali halides and becomes less and less accurate as
cationic and anionic charge increase, and as the anion becomes larger
and more polarisable. For instance, ionic bonding gives way to metallic
bonding along the series NaCl, Na₂O, Na₂S, Na₃P, Na₃As, Na₃Sb, Na₃Bi,
Na.[207]

Hydroxides

Large_Sodium_Explosion.jpg (≈ 1.4 kg) of sodium with water]] All the
alkali metals react vigorously or explosively with cold water, producing
an aqueous solution of a strongly basic alkali metal hydroxide and
releasing hydrogen gas.[208] This reaction becomes more vigorous going
down the group: lithium reacts steadily with effervescence, but sodium
and potassium can ignite and rubidium and caesium sink in water and
generate hydrogen gas so rapidly that shock waves form in the water that
may shatter glass containers.[209] When an alkali metal is dropped into
water, it produces an explosion, of which there are two separate stages.
The metal reacts with the water first, breaking the hydrogen bonds in
the water and producing hydrogen gas; this takes place faster for the
more reactive heavier alkali metals. Second, the heat generated by the
first part of the reaction often ignites the hydrogen gas, causing it to
burn explosively into the surrounding air. This secondary hydrogen gas
explosion produces the visible flame above the bowl of water, lake or
other body of water, not the initial reaction of the metal with water
(which tends to happen mostly under water).[210] The alkali metal
hydroxides are the most basic known hydroxides.[211]

Recent research has suggested that the explosive behavior of alkali
metals in water is driven by a Coulomb explosion rather than solely by
rapid generation of hydrogen itself.[212] All alkali metals melt as a
part of the reaction with water. Water molecules ionise the bare
metallic surface of the liquid metal, leaving a positively charged metal
surface and negatively charged water ions. The attraction between the
charged metal and water ions will rapidly increase the surface area,
causing an exponential increase of ionisation. When the repulsive forces
within the liquid metal surface exceeds the forces of the surface
tension, it vigorously explodes.[213]

The hydroxides themselves are the most basic hydroxides known, reacting
with acids to give salts and with alcohols to give oligomeric alkoxides.
They easily react with carbon dioxide to form carbonates or
bicarbonates, or with hydrogen sulfide to form sulfides or bisulfides,
and may be used to separate thiols from petroleum. They react with
amphoteric oxides: for example, the oxides of aluminium, zinc, tin, and
lead react with the alkali metal hydroxides to give aluminates,
zincates, stannates, and plumbates. Silicon dioxide is acidic, and thus
the alkali metal hydroxides can also attack silicate glass.[214]

Intermetallic compounds

NaK_alloy.jpg The alkali metals form many intermetallic compounds with
each other and the elements from groups 2 to 13 in the periodic table of
varying stoichiometries,[215] such as the sodium amalgams with mercury,
including Na₅Hg₈ and Na₃Hg.[216] Some of these have ionic
characteristics: taking the alloys with gold, the most electronegative
of metals, as an example, NaAu and KAu are metallic, but RbAu and CsAu
are semiconductors.[217] NaK is an alloy of sodium and potassium that is
very useful because it is liquid at room temperature, although
precautions must be taken due to its extreme reactivity towards water
and air. The eutectic mixture melts at −12.6 °C.[218] An alloy of 41%
caesium, 47% sodium, and 12% potassium has the lowest known melting
point of any metal or alloy, −78 °C.[219]

Compounds with the group 13 elements

The intermetallic compounds of the alkali metals with the heavier group
13 elements (aluminium, gallium, indium, and thallium), such as NaTl,
are poor conductors or semiconductors, unlike the normal alloys with the
preceding elements, implying that the alkali metal involved has lost an
electron to the Zintl anions involved.[220] Nevertheless, while the
elements in group 14 and beyond tend to form discrete anionic clusters,
group 13 elements tend to form polymeric ions with the alkali metal
cations located between the giant ionic lattice. For example, NaTl
consists of a polymeric anion (—Tl^(−)—)_(n) with a covalent diamond
cubic structure with Na⁺ ions located between the anionic lattice. The
larger alkali metals cannot fit similarly into an anionic lattice and
tend to force the heavier group 13 elements to form anionic
clusters.[221]

Boron is a special case, being the only nonmetal in group 13. The alkali
metal borides tend to be boron-rich, involving appreciable boron–boron
bonding involving deltahedral structures,[222] and are thermally
unstable due to the alkali metals having a very high vapour pressure at
elevated temperatures. This makes direct synthesis problematic because
the alkali metals do not react with boron below 700 °C, and thus this
must be accomplished in sealed containers with the alkali metal in
excess. Furthermore, exceptionally in this group, reactivity with boron
decreases down the group: lithium reacts completely at 700 °C, but
sodium at 900 °C and potassium not until 1200 °C, and the reaction is
instantaneous for lithium but takes hours for potassium. Rubidium and
caesium borides have not even been characterised. Various phases are
known, such as LiB₁₀, NaB₆, NaB₁₅, and KB₆.[223][224] Under high
pressure the boron–boron bonding in the lithium borides changes from
following Wade's rules to forming Zintl anions like the rest of group
13.[225]

Compounds with the group 14 elements

Lithium and sodium react with carbon to form acetylides, Li₂C₂ and
Na₂C₂, which can also be obtained by reaction of the metal with
acetylene. Potassium, rubidium, and caesium react with graphite; their
atoms are intercalated between the hexagonal graphite layers, forming
graphite intercalation compounds of formulae MC₆₀ (dark grey, almost
black), MC₄₈ (dark grey, almost black), MC₃₆ (blue), MC₂₄ (steel blue),
and MC₈ (bronze) (M = K, Rb, or Cs). These compounds are over 200 times
more electrically conductive than pure graphite, suggesting that the
valence electron of the alkali metal is transferred to the graphite
layers (e.g. ).[226] Upon heating of KC₈, the elimination of potassium
atoms results in the conversion in sequence to KC₂₄, KC₃₆, KC₄₈ and
finally KC₆₀. KC₈ is a very strong reducing agent and is pyrophoric and
explodes on contact with water.[227][228] While the larger alkali metals
(K, Rb, and Cs) initially form MC₈, the smaller ones initially form MC₆,
and indeed they require reaction of the metals with graphite at high
temperatures around 500 °C to form.[229] Apart from this, the alkali
metals are such strong reducing agents that they can even reduce
buckminsterfullerene to produce solid fullerides M_(_n_)C₆₀; sodium,
potassium, rubidium, and caesium can form fullerides where _n_ = 2, 3,
4, or 6, and rubidium and caesium additionally can achieve _n_ = 1.[230]

When the alkali metals react with the heavier elements in the carbon
group (silicon, germanium, tin, and lead), ionic substances with
cage-like structures are formed, such as the silicides M₄Si₄ (M = K, Rb,
or Cs), which contains M⁺ and tetrahedral ions.[231] The chemistry of
alkali metal germanides, involving the germanide ion Ge^(4−) and other
cluster (Zintl) ions such as , , , and [(Ge₉)₂]^(6−), is largely
analogous to that of the corresponding silicides.[232] Alkali metal
stannides are mostly ionic, sometimes with the stannide ion
(Sn^(4−)),[233] and sometimes with more complex Zintl ions such as ,
which appears in tetrapotassium nonastannide (K₄Sn₉).[234] The monatomic
plumbide ion (Pb^(4−)) is unknown, and indeed its formation is predicted
to be energetically unfavourable; alkali metal plumbides have complex
Zintl ions, such as . These alkali metal germanides, stannides, and
plumbides may be produced by reducing germanium, tin, and lead with
sodium metal in liquid ammonia.[235]

Nitrides and pnictides

Lithium-nitride-xtal-CM-3D-polyhedra.png ball-and-stick model of lithium
nitride.[236] On the basis of size a tetrahedral structure would be
expected, but that would be geometrically impossible: thus lithium
nitride takes on this unique crystal structure.[237]]] Lithium, the
lightest of the alkali metals, is the only alkali metal which reacts
with nitrogen at standard conditions, and its nitride is the only stable
alkali metal nitride. Nitrogen is an unreactive gas because breaking the
strong triple bond in the dinitrogen molecule (N₂) requires a lot of
energy. The formation of an alkali metal nitride would consume the
ionisation energy of the alkali metal (forming M⁺ ions), the energy
required to break the triple bond in N₂ and the formation of N^(3−)
ions, and all the energy released from the formation of an alkali metal
nitride is from the lattice energy of the alkali metal nitride. The
lattice energy is maximised with small, highly charged ions; the alkali
metals do not form highly charged ions, only forming ions with a charge
of +1, so only lithium, the smallest alkali metal, can release enough
lattice energy to make the reaction with nitrogen exothermic, forming
lithium nitride. The reactions of the other alkali metals with nitrogen
would not release enough lattice energy and would thus be endothermic,
so they do not form nitrides at standard conditions.[238] Sodium nitride
(Na₃N) and potassium nitride (K₃N), while existing, are extremely
unstable, being prone to decomposing back into their constituent
elements, and cannot be produced by reacting the elements with each
other at standard conditions.[239][240] Steric hindrance forbids the
existence of rubidium or caesium nitride.[241] However, sodium and
potassium form colourless azide salts involving the linear anion; due to
the large size of the alkali metal cations, they are thermally stable
enough to be able to melt before decomposing.[242]

All the alkali metals react readily with phosphorus and arsenic to form
phosphides and arsenides with the formula M₃Pn (where M represents an
alkali metal and Pn represents a pnictogen – phosphorus, arsenic,
antimony, or bismuth). This is due to the greater size of the P^(3−) and
As^(3−) ions, so that less lattice energy needs to be released for the
salts to form.[243] These are not the only phosphides and arsenides of
the alkali metals: for example, potassium has nine different known
phosphides, with formulae K₃P, K₄P₃, K₅P₄, KP, K₄P₆, K₃P₇, K₃P₁₁,
KP_(10.3), and KP₁₅.[244] While most metals form arsenides, only the
alkali and alkaline earth metals form mostly ionic arsenides. The
structure of Na₃As is complex with unusually short Na–Na distances of
328–330 pm which are shorter than in sodium metal, and this indicates
that even with these electropositive metals the bonding cannot be
straightforwardly ionic.[245] Other alkali metal arsenides not
conforming to the formula M₃As are known, such as LiAs, which has a
metallic lustre and electrical conductivity indicating the presence of
some metallic bonding.[246] The antimonides are unstable and reactive as
the Sb^(3−) ion is a strong reducing agent; reaction of them with acids
form the toxic and unstable gas stibine (SbH₃).[247] Indeed, they have
some metallic properties, and the alkali metal antimonides of
stoichiometry MSb involve antimony atoms bonded in a spiral Zintl
structure.[248] Bismuthides are not even wholly ionic; they are
intermetallic compounds containing partially metallic and partially
ionic bonds.[249]

Oxides and chalcogenides

All the alkali metals react vigorously with oxygen at standard
conditions. They form various types of oxides, such as simple oxides
(containing the O^(2−) ion), peroxides (containing the ion, where there
is a single bond between the two oxygen atoms), superoxides (containing
the ion), and many others. Lithium burns in air to form lithium oxide,
but sodium reacts with oxygen to form a mixture of sodium oxide and
sodium peroxide. Potassium forms a mixture of potassium peroxide and
potassium superoxide, while rubidium and caesium form the superoxide
exclusively. Their reactivity increases going down the group: while
lithium, sodium and potassium merely burn in air, rubidium and caesium
are pyrophoric (spontaneously catch fire in air).[250]

The smaller alkali metals tend to polarise the larger anions (the
peroxide and superoxide) due to their small size. This attracts the
electrons in the more complex anions towards one of its constituent
oxygen atoms, forming an oxide ion and an oxygen atom. This causes
lithium to form the oxide exclusively on reaction with oxygen at room
temperature. This effect becomes drastically weaker for the larger
sodium and potassium, allowing them to form the less stable peroxides.
Rubidium and caesium, at the bottom of the group, are so large that even
the least stable superoxides can form. Because the superoxide releases
the most energy when formed, the superoxide is preferentially formed for
the larger alkali metals where the more complex anions are not
polarised. (The oxides and peroxides for these alkali metals do exist,
but do not form upon direct reaction of the metal with oxygen at
standard conditions.)[251] In addition, the small size of the Li⁺ and
O^(2−) ions contributes to their forming a stable ionic lattice
structure. Under controlled conditions, however, all the alkali metals,
with the exception of francium, are known to form their oxides,
peroxides, and superoxides. The alkali metal peroxides and superoxides
are powerful oxidising agents. Sodium peroxide and potassium superoxide
react with carbon dioxide to form the alkali metal carbonate and oxygen
gas, which allows them to be used in submarine air purifiers; the
presence of water vapour, naturally present in breath, makes the removal
of carbon dioxide by potassium superoxide even more efficient.[252][253]
All the stable alkali metals except lithium can form red ozonides (MO₃)
through low-temperature reaction of the powdered anhydrous hydroxide
with ozone: the ozonides may be then extracted using liquid ammonia.
They slowly decompose at standard conditions to the superoxides and
oxygen, and hydrolyse immediately to the hydroxides when in contact with
water.[254] Potassium, rubidium, and caesium also form sesquioxides
M₂O₃, which may be better considered peroxide disuperoxides, .[255]

Rubidium and caesium can form a great variety of suboxides with the
metals in formal oxidation states below +1.[256] Rubidium can form Rb₆O
and Rb₉O₂ (copper-coloured) upon oxidation in air, while caesium forms
an immense variety of oxides, such as the ozonide CsO₃[257][258] and
several brightly coloured suboxides,[259] such as Cs₇O (bronze), Cs₄O
(red-violet), Cs₁₁O₃ (violet), Cs₃O (dark green),[260] CsO, Cs₃O₂,[261]
as well as Cs₇O₂.[262][263] The last of these may be heated under vacuum
to generate Cs₂O.[264]

The alkali metals can also react analogously with the heavier chalcogens
(sulfur, selenium, tellurium, and polonium), and all the alkali metal
chalcogenides are known (with the exception of francium's). Reaction
with an excess of the chalcogen can similarly result in lower
chalcogenides, with chalcogen ions containing chains of the chalcogen
atoms in question. For example, sodium can react with sulfur to form the
sulfide (Na₂S) and various polysulfides with the formula Na₂S_(_x_) (_x_
from 2 to 6), containing the ions.[265] Due to the basicity of the
Se^(2−) and Te^(2−) ions, the alkali metal selenides and tellurides are
alkaline in solution; when reacted directly with selenium and tellurium,
alkali metal polyselenides and polytellurides are formed along with the
selenides and tellurides with the and ions.[266] They may be obtained
directly from the elements in liquid ammonia or when air is not present,
and are colourless, water-soluble compounds that air oxidises quickly
back to selenium or tellurium.[267] The alkali metal polonides are all
ionic compounds containing the Po^(2−) ion; they are very chemically
stable and can be produced by direct reaction of the elements at around
300–400 °C.[268][269][270]

Halides, hydrides, and pseudohalides

The alkali metals are among the most electropositive elements on the
periodic table and thus tend to bond ionically to the most
electronegative elements on the periodic table, the halogens (fluorine,
chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine), forming salts known as the
alkali metal halides. The reaction is very vigorous and can sometimes
result in explosions.[271] All twenty stable alkali metal halides are
known; the unstable ones are not known, with the exception of sodium
astatide, because of the great instability and rarity of astatine and
francium. The most well-known of the twenty is certainly sodium
chloride, otherwise known as common salt. All of the stable alkali metal
halides have the formula MX where M is an alkali metal and X is a
halogen. They are all white ionic crystalline solids that have high
melting points.[272][273] All the alkali metal halides are soluble in
water except for lithium fluoride (LiF), which is insoluble in water due
to its very high lattice enthalpy. The high lattice enthalpy of lithium
fluoride is due to the small sizes of the Li⁺ and F^(−) ions, causing
the electrostatic interactions between them to be strong:[274] a similar
effect occurs for magnesium fluoride, consistent with the diagonal
relationship between lithium and magnesium.[275]

The alkali metals also react similarly with hydrogen to form ionic
alkali metal hydrides, where the hydride anion acts as a pseudohalide:
these are often used as reducing agents, producing hydrides, complex
metal hydrides, or hydrogen gas.[276][277] Other pseudohalides are also
known, notably the cyanides. These are isostructural to the respective
halides except for lithium cyanide, indicating that the cyanide ions may
rotate freely.[278] Ternary alkali metal halide oxides, such as Na₃ClO,
K₃BrO (yellow), Na₄Br₂O, Na₄I₂O, and K₄Br₂O, are also known.[279] The
polyhalides are rather unstable, although those of rubidium and caesium
are greatly stabilised by the feeble polarising power of these extremely
large cations.[280]

Coordination complexes

Alkali metal cations do not usually form coordination complexes with
simple Lewis bases due to their low charge of just +1 and their
relatively large size; thus the Li⁺ ion forms most complexes and the
heavier alkali metal ions form less and less (though exceptions occur
for weak complexes).[281] Lithium in particular has a very rich
coordination chemistry in which it exhibits coordination numbers from 1
to 12, although octahedral hexacoordination is its preferred mode.[282]
In aqueous solution, the alkali metal ions exist as octahedral
hexahydrate complexes ([M(H₂O)₆)]⁺), with the exception of the lithium
ion, which due to its small size forms tetrahedral tetrahydrate
complexes ([Li(H₂O)₄)]⁺); the alkali metals form these complexes because
their ions are attracted by electrostatic forces of attraction to the
polar water molecules. Because of this, anhydrous salts containing
alkali metal cations are often used as desiccants.[283] Alkali metals
also readily form complexes with crown ethers (e.g. 12-crown-4 for Li⁺,
15-crown-5 for Na⁺, 18-crown-6 for K⁺, and 21-crown-7 for Rb⁺) and
cryptands due to electrostatic attraction.[284]

Ammonia solutions

The alkali metals dissolve slowly in liquid ammonia, forming ammoniacal
solutions of solvated M⁺ and e^(−), which react to form hydrogen gas and
the alkali metal amide (MNH₂, where M represents an alkali metal): this
was first noted by Humphry Davy in 1809 and rediscovered by W. Weyl in
1864. The process may be speeded up by a catalyst. Similar solutions are
formed by the heavy divalent alkaline earth metals calcium, strontium,
barium, as well as the divalent lanthanides, europium and ytterbium. The
amide salt is quite insoluble and readily precipitates out of solution,
leaving intensely coloured ammonia solutions of the alkali metals. In
1907, Charles Krause identified the colour as being due to the presence
of solvated electrons, which contribute to the high electrical
conductivity of these solutions. At low concentrations (below 3 M), the
solution is dark blue and has ten times the conductivity of aqueous
sodium chloride; at higher concentrations (above 3 M), the solution is
copper-coloured and has approximately the conductivity of liquid metals
like mercury.[285][286][287] In addition to the alkali metal amide salt
and solvated electrons, such ammonia solutions also contain the alkali
metal cation (M⁺), the neutral alkali metal atom (M), diatomic alkali
metal molecules (M₂) and alkali metal anions (M^(−)). These are unstable
and eventually become the more thermodynamically stable alkali metal
amide and hydrogen gas. Solvated electrons are powerful reducing agents
and are often used in chemical synthesis.[288]

Organometallic

Organolithium

Butyllithium-hexamer-from-xtal-3D-balls-A.png hexamer, (C₄H₉Li)₆.[289]
The aggregates are held together by delocalised covalent bonds between
lithium and the terminal carbon of the butyl chain.[290] There is no
direct lithium–lithium bonding in any organolithium compound.[291]]]
Phenyllithium-chain-from-xtal-Mercury-3D-balls.png forms monoclinic
crystals can be described as consisting of dimeric Li₂(C₆H₅)₂ subunits.
The lithium atoms and the _ipso_ carbons of the phenyl rings form a
planar four-membered ring. The plane of the phenyl groups are
perpendicular to the plane of this Li₂C₂ ring. Additional strong
intermolecular bonding occurs between these phenyllithium dimers and the
π electrons of the phenyl groups in the adjacent dimers, resulting in an
infinite polymeric ladder structure.[292]]]

Being the smallest alkali metal, lithium forms the widest variety of and
most stable organometallic compounds, which are bonded covalently.
Organolithium compounds are electrically non-conducting volatile solids
or liquids that melt at low temperatures, and tend to form oligomers
with the structure (RLi)_(_x_) where R is the organic group. As the
electropositive nature of lithium puts most of the charge density of the
bond on the carbon atom, effectively creating a carbanion, organolithium
compounds are extremely powerful bases and nucleophiles. For use as
bases, butyllithiums are often used and are commercially available. An
example of an organolithium compound is methyllithium ((CH₃Li)_(_x_)),
which exists in tetrameric (_x_ = 4, tetrahedral) and hexameric (_x_ =
6, octahedral) forms.[293][294] Organolithium compounds, especially
_n_-butyllithium, are useful reagents in organic synthesis, as might be
expected given lithium's diagonal relationship with magnesium, which
plays an important role in the Grignard reaction.[295] For example,
alkyllithiums and aryllithiums may be used to synthesise aldehydes and
ketones by reaction with metal carbonyls. The reaction with nickel
tetracarbonyl, for example, proceeds through an unstable acyl nickel
carbonyl complex which then undergoes electrophilic substitution to give
the desired aldehyde (using H⁺ as the electrophile) or ketone (using an
alkyl halide) product.[296]

    LiR + [Ni(CO)₄] Li⁺[RCONi(CO)₃]^(−)
    Li⁺[RCONi(CO)₃]^(−) Li⁺ + RCHO + [(solvent)Ni(CO)₃]
    Li⁺[RCONi(CO)₃]^(−) Li⁺ + R'COR + [(solvent)Ni(CO)₃]

Alkyllithiums and aryllithiums may also react with _N_,_N_-disubstituted
amides to give aldehydes and ketones, and symmetrical ketones by
reacting with carbon monoxide. They thermally decompose to eliminate a
β-hydrogen, producing alkenes and lithium hydride: another route is the
reaction of ethers with alkyl- and aryllithiums that act as strong
bases.[297] In non-polar solvents, aryllithiums react as the carbanions
they effectively are, turning carbon dioxide to aromatic carboxylic
acids (ArCO₂H) and aryl ketones to tertiary carbinols (Ar'₂C(Ar)OH).
Finally, they may be used to synthesise other organometallic compounds
through metal-halogen exchange.[298]

Heavier alkali metals

Unlike the organolithium compounds, the organometallic compounds of the
heavier alkali metals are predominantly ionic. The application of
organosodium compounds in chemistry is limited in part due to
competition from organolithium compounds, which are commercially
available and exhibit more convenient reactivity. The principal
organosodium compound of commercial importance is sodium
cyclopentadienide. Sodium tetraphenylborate can also be classified as an
organosodium compound since in the solid state sodium is bound to the
aryl groups. Organometallic compounds of the higher alkali metals are
even more reactive than organosodium compounds and of limited utility. A
notable reagent is Schlosser's base, a mixture of _n_-butyllithium and
potassium _tert_-butoxide. This reagent reacts with propene to form the
compound allylpotassium (KCH₂CHCH₂). _cis_-2-Butene and _trans_-2-butene
equilibrate when in contact with alkali metals. Whereas isomerisation is
fast with lithium and sodium, it is slow with the heavier alkali metals.
The heavier alkali metals also favour the sterically congested
conformation.[299] Several crystal structures of organopotassium
compounds have been reported, establishing that they, like the sodium
compounds, are polymeric.[300] Organosodium, organopotassium,
organorubidium and organocaesium compounds are all mostly ionic and are
insoluble (or nearly so) in nonpolar solvents.[301]

Alkyl and aryl derivatives of sodium and potassium tend to react with
air. They cause the cleavage of ethers, generating alkoxides. Unlike
alkyllithium compounds, alkylsodiums and alkylpotassiums cannot be made
by reacting the metals with alkyl halides because Wurtz coupling
occurs:[302]

    RM + R'X → R–R' + MX

As such, they have to be made by reacting alkylmercury compounds with
sodium or potassium metal in inert hydrocarbon solvents. While
methylsodium forms tetramers like methyllithium, methylpotassium is more
ionic and has the nickel arsenide structure with discrete methyl anions
and potassium cations.[303]

The alkali metals and their hydrides react with acidic hydrocarbons, for
example cyclopentadienes and terminal alkynes, to give salts. Liquid
ammonia, ether, or hydrocarbon solvents are used, the most common of
which being tetrahydrofuran. The most important of these compounds is
sodium cyclopentadienide, NaC₅H₅, an important precursor to many
transition metal cyclopentadienyl derivatives.[304] Similarly, the
alkali metals react with cyclooctatetraene in tetrahydrofuran to give
alkali metal cyclooctatetraenides; for example, dipotassium
cyclooctatetraenide (K₂C₈H₈) is an important precursor to many metal
cyclooctatetraenyl derivatives, such as uranocene.[305] The large and
very weakly polarising alkali metal cations can stabilise large,
aromatic, polarisable radical anions, such as the dark-green sodium
naphthalenide, Na⁺[C₁₀H₈•]^(−), a strong reducing agent.[306]


Representative reactions of alkali metals

_REACTION WITH OXYGEN_

Upon reacting with oxygen, alkali metals form oxides, peroxides,
superoxides and suboxides. However, the first three are more common. The
table below[307] shows the types of compounds formed in reaction with
oxygen. The compound in brackets represents the minor product of
combustion.

  -------------- -------- ---------- ------------
  ALKALI METAL   OXIDE    PEROXIDE   SUPEROXIDE
  Li             Li₂O     (Li₂O₂)
  Na             (Na₂O)   Na₂O₂
  K                                  KO₂
  Rb                                 RbO₂
  Cs                                 CsO₂
  -------------- -------- ---------- ------------

The alkali metal peroxides are ionic compounds that are unstable in
water. The peroxide anion is weakly bound to the cation, and it is
hydrolysed, forming stronger covalent bonds.

    Na₂O₂ + 2H₂O → 2NaOH + H₂O₂

The other oxygen compounds are also unstable in water.

    2KO₂ + 2H₂O → 2KOH + H₂O₂ + O₂[308]
    Li₂O + H₂O → 2LiOH

_REACTION WITH SULPHUR_

With sulphur, they form sulphides and polysulphides.[309]

    2Na + 1/8S₈ → Na₂S + 1/8S₈ → Na₂S₂...Na₂S₇

Because alkali metal sulphides are essentially salts of a weak acid and
a strong base, they form basic solutions.

    S²⁻ + H₂O → HS^(−) + HO^(−)
    HS^(−) + H₂O → H₂S + HO^(−)

_REACTION WITH NITROGEN_

Lithium is the only metal that combines directly with nitrogen at room
temperature.

    3Li + 1/3N₂ → Li₃N

Li₃N can react with water to liberate ammonia.

    Li₃N + 3H₂O → 3LiOH + NH₃

_REACTION WITH HYDROGEN_

With hydrogen, alkali metals form saline hydrides that hydrolyse in
water.

    Na + H₂ → NaH (at high temperatures)
    NaH + H₂O → NaOH + H₂

_REACTION WITH CARBON_

Lithium is the only metal that rects directly with carbon to give
dilithium acetylide. Na and K can react with acetylene to give
acetylides.[310]

    2Li + 2C → Li₂C₂
    Na + C₂H₂ → NaC₂H + 1/2H₂ (at 150⁰C)
    Na + NaC₂H → Na₂C₂ (at 220⁰C)

_REACTION WITH WATER_

On reaction with water, they generate hydroxide ions and hydrogen gas.
This reaction is vigorous and highly exothermic and the hydrogen
resulted may ignite in air or even explode in the case of Rb and
Cs.[311]

    Na + H₂O → NaOH + 1/2H₂

_REACTION WITH OTHER SALTS_

The alkali metals are very good reducing agents. They can reduce metal
cations that are less electropositive. Titanium is produced industrially
by the reduction of titanium tetrachloride with Na at 400⁰C (van Arkel
process).

    TiCl₄ + 4Na → 4NaCl + Ti

_REACTION WITH ORGANOHALIDE COMPOUNDS_

Alkali metals react with halogen derivatives to generate hydrocarbon via
the Wurtz reaction.

    2CH₃-Cl + 2Na → H₃C-CH₃ + 2NaCl

_ALKALI METALS IN LIQUID AMMONIA_

Alkali metals dissolve in liquid ammonia or other donor solvents like
aliphatic amines or hexamethylphosphoramide to give blue solutions.
These solutions are believed to contain free electrons.[312]

    Na + xNH₃ → Na⁺ + e(NH₃)_(x)^(−)

Due to the presence of solvated electrons, these solutions are very
powerful reducing agents used in organic synthesis.

Na_in_lie._am.jpg

Reaction 1) is known as Birch reduction. Other reductions[313] that can
be carried by these solutions are:

    S₈ + 2e^(−) → S₈²⁻
    Fe(CO)₅ + 2e^(−) → Fe(CO)₄²⁻ + CO


Extensions

Atomic_radius_of_alkali_metals_and_alkaline_earth_metals.svg (Na–Cs,
Mg–Ra) and predicted (Fr–Uhp, Ubn–Uhh) atomic radius of the alkali and
alkaline earth metals from the third to the ninth period, measured in
angstroms[314][315]]] Although francium is the heaviest alkali metal
that has been discovered, there has been some theoretical work
predicting the physical and chemical characteristics of the hypothetical
heavier alkali metals. Being the first period 8 element, the
undiscovered element ununennium (element 119) is predicted to be the
next alkali metal after francium and behave much like their lighter
congeners; however, it is also predicted to differ from the lighter
alkali metals in some properties.[316] Its chemistry is predicted to be
closer to that of potassium[317] or rubidium[318] instead of caesium or
francium. This is unusual as periodic trends, ignoring relativistic
effects would predict ununennium to be even more reactive than caesium
and francium. This lowered reactivity is due to the relativistic
stabilisation of ununennium's valence electron, increasing ununennium's
first ionisation energy and decreasing the metallic and ionic
radii;[319] this effect is already seen for francium.[320] This assumes
that ununennium will behave chemically as an alkali metal, which,
although likely, may not be true due to relativistic effects.[321] The
relativistic stabilisation of the 8s orbital also increases ununennium's
electron affinity far beyond that of caesium and francium; indeed,
ununennium is expected to have an electron affinity higher than all the
alkali metals lighter than it. Relativistic effects also cause a very
large drop in the polarisability of ununennium.[322] On the other hand,
ununennium is predicted to continue the trend of melting points
decreasing going down the group, being expected to have a melting point
between 0 °C and 30 °C.[323]

Electron_affinity_of_alkali_metals.svg, measured in electron
volts[324][325]]] The stabilisation of ununennium's valence electron and
thus the contraction of the 8s orbital cause its atomic radius to be
lowered to 240 pm,[326] very close to that of rubidium (247 pm),[327] so
that the chemistry of ununennium in the +1 oxidation state should be
more similar to the chemistry of rubidium than to that of francium. On
the other hand, the ionic radius of the Uue⁺ ion is predicted to be
larger than that of Rb⁺, because the 7p orbitals are destabilised and
are thus larger than the p-orbitals of the lower shells. Ununennium may
also show the +3 oxidation state,[328] which is not seen in any other
alkali metal,[329] in addition to the +1 oxidation state that is
characteristic of the other alkali metals and is also the main oxidation
state of all the known alkali metals: this is because of the
destabilisation and expansion of the 7p_(3/2) spinor, causing its
outermost electrons to have a lower ionisation energy than what would
otherwise be expected.[330][331] Indeed, many ununennium compounds are
expected to have a large covalent character, due to the involvement of
the 7p_(3/2) electrons in the bonding.[332]

Ionization_energy_of_alkali_metals_and_alkaline_earth_metals.svg Not as
much work has been done predicting the properties of the alkali metals
beyond ununennium. Although a simple extrapolation of the periodic table
would put element 169, unhexennium, under ununennium, Dirac-Fock
calculations predict that the next alkali metal after ununennium may
actually be element 165, unhexpentium, which is predicted to have the
electron configuration [Og] 5g¹⁸ 6f¹⁴ 7d¹⁰ 8s² 8p_(1/2)² 9s¹.[333][334]
Furthermore, this element would be intermediate in properties between an
alkali metal and a group 11 element, and while its physical and atomic
properties would be closer to the former, its chemistry may be closer to
that of the latter. Further calculations show that unhexpentium would
follow the trend of increasing ionisation energy beyond caesium, having
an ionisation energy comparable to that of sodium, and that it should
also continue the trend of decreasing atomic radii beyond caesium,
having an atomic radius comparable to that of potassium.[335] However,
the 7d electrons of unhexpentium may also be able to participate in
chemical reactions along with the 9s electron, possibly allowing
oxidation states beyond +1, whence the likely transition metal behaviour
of unhexpentium.[336][337] Due to the alkali and alkaline earth metals
both being s-block elements, these predictions for the trends and
properties of ununennium and unhexpentium also mostly hold quite
similarly for the corresponding alkaline earth metals unbinilium (Ubn)
and unhexhexium (Uhh).[338]

The probable properties of further alkali metals beyond unhexpentium
have not been explored yet as of 2015; in fact, it is suspected that
they may not be able to exist.[339] In periods 8 and above of the
periodic table, relativistic and shell-structure effects become so
strong that extrapolations from lighter congeners become completely
inaccurate. In addition, the relativistic and shell-structure effects
(which stabilise the s-orbitals and destabilise and expand the d-, f-,
and g-orbitals of higher shells) have opposite effects, causing even
larger difference between relativistic and non-relativistic calculations
of the properties of elements with such high atomic numbers.[340]
Interest in the chemical properties of ununennium and unhexpentium stems
from the fact that both elements are located close to the expected
locations of islands of stabilities, centered at elements 122 (³⁰⁶Ubb)
and 164 (⁴⁸²Uhq).[341][342][343]


Pseudo-alkali metals

Many other substances are similar to the alkali metals in their tendency
to form monopositive cations. Analogously to the pseudohalogens, they
have sometimes been called "pseudo-alkali metals". These substances
include some elements and many more polyatomic ions; the polyatomic ions
are especially similar to the alkali metals in their large size and weak
polarising power.[344]

Hydrogen

The element hydrogen, with one electron per neutral atom, is usually
placed at the top of Group 1 of the periodic table for convenience, but
hydrogen is not normally considered to be an alkali metal;[345] when it
is considered to be an alkali metal, it is because of its atomic
properties and not its chemical properties.[346] Under typical
conditions, pure hydrogen exists as a diatomic gas consisting of two
atoms per molecule (H₂);[347] however, the alkali metals only form
diatomic molecules (such as dilithium, Li₂) at high temperatures, when
they are in the gaseous state.[348]

Hydrogen, like the alkali metals, has one valence electron[349] and
reacts easily with the halogens,[350] but the similarities end there
because of the small size of a bare proton H⁺ compared to the alkali
metal cations.[351] Its placement above lithium is primarily due to its
electron configuration.[352][353] It is sometimes placed above carbon
due to their similar electronegativities[354] or fluorine due to their
similar chemical properties.[355][356]

The first ionisation energy of hydrogen (1312.0 kJ/mol) is much higher
than that of the alkali metals.[357][358] As only one additional
electron is required to fill in the outermost shell of the hydrogen
atom, hydrogen often behaves like a halogen, forming the negative
hydride ion, and is very occasionally considered to be a halogen on that
basis.[359] (The alkali metals can also form negative ions, known as
alkalides, but these are little more than laboratory curiosities, being
unstable.)[360][361] An argument against this placement is that
formation of hydride from hydrogen is endothermic, unlike the exothermic
formation of halides from halogens. The radius of the H^(−) anion also
does not fit the trend of increasing size going down the halogens:
indeed, H^(−) is very diffuse because its single proton cannot easily
control both electrons.[362] It was expected for some time that liquid
hydrogen would show metallic properties;[363] while this has been shown
to not be the case, under extremely high pressures, such as those found
at the cores of Jupiter and Saturn, hydrogen does become metallic and
behaves like an alkali metal; in this phase, it is known as metallic
hydrogen.[364] The electrical resistivity of liquid metallic hydrogen at
3000 K is approximately equal to that of liquid rubidium and caesium at
2000 K at the respective pressures when they undergo a nonmetal-to-metal
transition.[365]

The 1s¹ electron configuration of hydrogen, while superficially similar
to that of the alkali metals (ns¹), is unique because there is no 1p
subshell. Hence it can lose an electron to form the hydron H⁺, or gain
one to form the hydride ion H^(−).[366] In the former case it resembles
superficially the alkali metals; in the latter case, the halogens, but
the differences due to the lack of a 1p subshell are important enough
that neither group fits the properties of hydrogen well.[367] Group 14
is also a good fit in terms of thermodynamic properties such as
ionisation energy and electron affinity, but makes chemical nonsense
because hydrogen cannot be tetravalent. Thus none of the three
placements are entirely satisfactory, although group 1 is the most
common placement (if one is chosen) because the hydron is by far the
most important of all monatomic hydrogen species, being the foundation
of acid-base chemistry.[368] As an example of hydrogen's unorthodox
properties stemming from its unusual electron configuration and small
size, the hydrogen ion is very small (radius around 150 fm compared to
the 50–220 pm size of most other atoms and ions) and so is nonexistent
in condensed systems other than in association with other atoms or
molecules. Indeed, transferring of protons between chemicals is the
basis of acid-base chemistry.[369] Also unique is hydrogen's ability to
form hydrogen bonds, which are an effect of charge-transfer,
electrostatic, and electron correlative contributing phenomena.[370]
While analogous lithium bonds are also known, they are mostly
electrostatic.[371] Nevertheless, hydrogen can take on the same
structural role as the alkali metals in some molecular crystals, and has
a close relationship with the lightest alkali metals (especially
lithium).[372]

Ammonium and derivatives

Hydrochloric_acid_ammonia.jpg reacts with hydrochloric acid to form the
salt ammonium chloride.]] The ammonium ion () has very similar
properties to the heavier alkali metals, acting as an alkali metal
intermediate between potassium and rubidium,[373][374] and is often
considered a close relative.[375][376][377] For example, most alkali
metal salts are soluble in water, a property which ammonium salts
share.[378] Ammonium is expected to behave stably as a metal ( ions in a
sea of delocalised electrons) at very high pressures (though less than
the typical pressure where transitions from insulating to metallic
behaviour occur around, 100 GPa), and could possibly occur inside the
ice giants Uranus and Neptune, which may have significant impacts on
their interior magnetic fields.[379][380] It has been estimated that the
transition from a mixture of ammonia and dihydrogen molecules to
metallic ammonium may occur at pressures just below 25 GPa.[381] Under
standard conditions, ammonium can form a metallic amalgam with
mercury.[382]

Other "pseudo-alkali metals" include the alkylammonium cations, in which
some of the hydrogen atoms in the ammonium cation are replaced by alkyl
or aryl groups. In particular, the quaternary ammonium cations () are
very useful since they are permanently charged, and they are often used
as an alternative to the expensive Cs⁺ to stabilise very large and very
easily polarisable anions such as .[383] Tetraalkylammonium hydroxides,
like alkali metal hydroxides, are very strong bases that react with
atmospheric carbon dioxide to form carbonates.[384] Furthermore, the
nitrogen atom may be replaced by a phosphorus, arsenic, or antimony atom
(the heavier nonmetallic pnictogens), creating a phosphonium () or
arsonium () cation that can itself be substituted similarly; while
stibonium () itself is not known, some of its organic derivatives are
characterised.[385]

Cobaltocene and derivatives

Cobaltocene, Co(C₅H₅)₂, is a metallocene, the cobalt analogue of
ferrocene. It is a dark purple solid. Cobaltocene has 19 valence
electrons, one more than usually found in organotransition metal
complexes, such as its very stable relative, ferrocene, in accordance
with the 18-electron rule. This additional electron occupies an orbital
that is antibonding with respect to the Co–C bonds. Consequently, many
chemical reactions of Co(C₅H₅)₂ are characterized by its tendency to
lose this "extra" electron, yielding a very stable 18-electron cation
known as cobaltocenium. Many cobaltocenium salts coprecipitate with
caesium salts, and cobaltocenium hydroxide is a strong base that absorbs
atmospheric carbon dioxide to form cobaltocenium carbonate.[386] Like
the alkali metals, cobaltocene is a strong reducing agent, and
decamethylcobaltocene is stronger still due to the combined inductive
effect of the ten methyl groups.[387] Cobalt may be substituted by its
heavier congener rhodium to give rhodocene, an even stronger reducing
agent.[388] Iridocene (involving iridium) would presumably be still more
potent, but is not very well-studied due to its instability.[389]

Thallium

Thallium_pieces_in_ampoule.jpg, stored under argon gas]]

Thallium is the heaviest stable element in group 13 of the periodic
table. At the bottom of the periodic table, the inert pair effect is
quite strong, because of the relativistic stabilisation of the 6s
orbital and the decreasing bond energy as the atoms increase in size so
that the amount of energy released in forming two more bonds is not
worth the high ionisation energies of the 6s electrons.[390] It displays
the +1 oxidation state[391] that all the known alkali metals
display,[392] and thallium compounds with thallium in its +1 oxidation
state closely resemble the corresponding potassium or silver compounds
stoichiometrically due to the similar ionic radii of the Tl⁺ (164 pm),
K⁺ (152 pm) and Ag⁺ (129 pm) ions.[393][394] It was sometimes considered
an alkali metal in continental Europe (but not in England) in the years
immediately following its discovery,[395] and was placed just after
caesium as the sixth alkali metal in Dmitri Mendeleev's 1869 periodic
table and Julius Lothar Meyer's 1868 periodic table.[396] (Mendeleev's
1871 periodic table and Meyer's 1870 periodic table put thallium in its
current position in the boron group and left the space below caesium
blank.)[397] However, thallium also displays the oxidation state
+3,[398] which no known alkali metal displays[399] (although ununennium,
the undiscovered seventh alkali metal, is predicted to possibly display
the +3 oxidation state).[400] The sixth alkali metal is now considered
to be francium.[401] While Tl⁺ is stabilised by the inert pair effect,
this inert pair of 6s electrons is still able to participate chemically,
so that these electrons are stereochemically active in aqueous solution.
Additionally, the thallium halides (except TlF) are quite insoluble in
water, and TlI has an unusual structure because of the presence of the
stereochemically active inert pair in thallium.[402]

Copper, silver, and gold

The group 11 metals (or coinage metals), copper, silver, and gold, are
typically categorised as transition metals given they can form ions with
incomplete d-shells. Physically, they have the relatively low melting
points and high electronegativity values associated with post-transition
metals. "The filled _d_ subshell and free _s_ electron of Cu, Ag, and Au
contribute to their high electrical and thermal conductivity. Transition
metals to the left of group 11 experience interactions between _s_
electrons and the partially filled _d_ subshell that lower electron
mobility."[403] Chemically, the group 11 metals behave like main-group
metals in their +1 valence states, and are hence somewhat related to the
alkali metals: this is one reason for their previously being labelled as
"group IB", paralleling the alkali metals' "group IA". They are
occasionally classified as post-transition metals.[404] Their spectra
are analogous to those of the alkali metals.[405] Their monopositive
ions are paramagnetic and contribute no colour to their salts, like
those of the alkali metals.[406]

In Mendeleev's 1871 periodic table, copper, silver, and gold are listed
twice, once under group VIII (with the iron triad and platinum group
metals), and once under group IB. Group IB was nonetheless parenthesised
to note that it was tentative. Mendeleev's main criterion for group
assignment was the maximum oxidation state of an element: on that basis,
the group 11 elements could not be classified in group IB, due to the
existence of copper(II) and gold(III) compounds being known at that
time.[407] However, eliminating group IB would make group I the only
main group (group VIII was labelled a transition group) to lack an A–B
bifurcation.[408] Soon afterward, a majority of chemists chose to
classify these elements in group IB and remove them from group VIII for
the resulting symmetry: this was the predominant classification until
the rise of the modern medium-long 18-column periodic table, which
separated the alkali metals and group 11 metals.[409]

The coinage metals were traditionally regarded as a subdivision of the
alkali metal group, due to them sharing the characteristic s¹ electron
configuration of the alkali metals (group 1: p⁶s¹; group 11: d¹⁰s¹).
However, the similarities are largely confined to the stoichiometries of
the +1 compounds of both groups, and not their chemical properties.[410]
This stems from the filled d subshell providing a much weaker shielding
effect on the outermost s electron than the filled p subshell, so that
the coinage metals have much higher first ionisation energies and
smaller ionic radii than do the corresponding alkali metals.[411]
Furthermore, they have higher melting points, hardnesses, and densities,
and lower reactivities and solubilities in liquid ammonia, as well as
having more covalent character in their compounds.[412] Finally, the
alkali metals are at the top of the electrochemical series, whereas the
coinage metals are almost at the very bottom.[413] The coinage metals'
filled d shell is much more easily disrupted than the alkali metals'
filled p shell, so that the second and third ionisation energies are
lower, enabling higher oxidation states than +1 and a richer
coordination chemistry, thus giving the group 11 metals clear transition
metal character.[414] Particularly noteworthy is gold forming ionic
compounds with rubidium and caesium, in which it forms the auride ion
(Au^(−)) which also occurs in solvated form in liquid ammonia solution:
here gold behaves as a pseudohalogen because its 5d¹⁰6s¹ configuration
has one electron less than the quasi-closed shell 5d¹⁰6s² configuration
of mercury.[415]


Production and isolation

The production of pure alkali metals is somewhat complicated due to
their extreme reactivity with commonly used substances, such as
water.[416][417] From their silicate ores, all the stable alkali metals
may be obtained the same way: sulfuric acid is first used to dissolve
the desired alkali metal ion and aluminium(III) ions from the ore
(leaching), whereupon basic precipitation removes aluminium ions from
the mixture by precipitating it as the hydroxide. The remaining
insoluble alkali metal carbonate is then precipitated selectively; the
salt is then dissolved in hydrochloric acid to produce the chloride. The
result is then left to evaporate and the alkali metal can then be
isolated.[418] Lithium and sodium are typically isolated through
electrolysis from their liquid chlorides, with calcium chloride
typically added to lower the melting point of the mixture. The heavier
alkali metals, however, is more typically isolated in a different way,
where a reducing agent (typically sodium for potassium and magnesium or
calcium for the heaviest alkali metals) is used to reduce the alkali
metal chloride. The liquid or gaseous product (the alkali metal) then
undergoes fractional distillation for purification.[419] Most routes to
the pure alkali metals require the use of electrolysis due to their high
reactivity; one of the few which does not is the pyrolysis of the
corresponding alkali metal azide, which yields the metal for sodium,
potassium, rubidium, and caesium and the nitride for lithium.[420]

Lithium salts have to be extracted from the water of mineral springs,
brine pools, and brine deposits. The metal is produced electrolytically
from a mixture of fused lithium chloride and potassium chloride.[421]

Sodium occurs mostly in seawater and dried seabed,[422] but is now
produced through electrolysis of sodium chloride by lowering the melting
point of the substance to below 700 °C through the use of a Downs
cell.[423][424] Extremely pure sodium can be produced through the
thermal decomposition of sodium azide.[425] Potassium occurs in many
minerals, such as sylvite (potassium chloride).[426] Previously,
potassium was generally made from the electrolysis of potassium chloride
or potassium hydroxide,[427] found extensively in places such as Canada,
Russia, Belarus, Germany, Israel, United States, and Jordan, in a method
similar to how sodium was produced in the late 1800s and early
1900s.[428] It can also be produced from seawater.[429] However, these
methods are problematic because the potassium metal tends to dissolve in
its molten chloride and vaporises significantly at the operating
temperatures, potentially forming the explosive superoxide. As a result,
pure potassium metal is now produced by reducing molten potassium
chloride with sodium metal at 850 °C.[430]

    Na (g) + KCl (l) NaCl (l) + K (g)

Although sodium is less reactive than potassium, this process works
because at such high temperatures potassium is more volatile than sodium
and can easily be distilled off, so that the equilibrium shifts towards
the right to produce more potassium gas and proceeds almost to
completion.[431]

Pichblende.jpg contains about 100,000 atoms (3.3 g) of francium-223 at
any given time.[432]|alt=A shiny gray 5-centimeter piece of matter with
a rough surface.]] For several years in the 1950s and 1960s, a
by-product of the potassium production called Alkarb was a main source
for rubidium. Alkarb contained 21% rubidium while the rest was potassium
and a small fraction of caesium.[433] Today the largest producers of
caesium, for example the Tanco Mine in Manitoba, Canada, produce
rubidium as by-product from pollucite.[434] Today, a common method for
separating rubidium from potassium and caesium is the fractional
crystallisation of a rubidium and caesium alum (Cs,Rb)Al(SO₄)₂·12H₂O,
which yields pure rubidium alum after approximately 30
recrystallisations.[435][436] The limited applications and the lack of a
mineral rich in rubidium limit the production of rubidium compounds to 2
to 4 tonnes per year.[437] Caesium, however, is not produced from the
above reaction. Instead, the mining of pollucite ore is the main method
of obtaining pure caesium, extracted from the ore mainly by three
methods: acid digestion, alkaline decomposition, and direct
reduction.[438][439] Both metals are produced as by-products of lithium
production: after 1958, when interest in lithium's thermonuclear
properties increased sharply, the production of rubidium and caesium
also increased correspondingly.[440] Pure rubidium and caesium metals
are produced by reducing their chlorides with calcium metal at 750 °C
and low pressure.[441]

As a result of its extreme rarity in nature,[442] most francium is
synthesised in the nuclear reaction ¹⁹⁷Au + ¹⁸O → ²¹⁰Fr + 5 n, yielding
francium-209, francium-210, and francium-211.[443] The greatest quantity
of francium ever assembled to date is about 300,000 neutral atoms,[444]
which were synthesised using the nuclear reaction given above.[445] When
the only natural isotope francium-223 is specifically required, it is
produced as the alpha daughter of actinium-227, itself produced
synthetically from the neutron irradiation of natural radium-226, one of
the daughters of natural uranium-238.[446]


Applications

FOCS-1.jpg Lithium, sodium, and potassium have many applications, while
rubidium and caesium are very useful in academic contexts but do not
have many applications yet.[447] Lithium is often used in lithium-ion
batteries, and lithium oxide can help process silica. Lithium stearate
is a thickener and can be used to make lubricating greases; it is
produced from lithium hydroxide, which is also used to absorb carbon
dioxide in space capsules and submarines.[448] Lithium chloride is used
as a brazing alloy for aluminium parts.[449] Metallic lithium is used in
alloys with magnesium and aluminium to give very tough and light
alloys.[450]

Sodium compounds have many applications, the most well-known being
sodium chloride as table salt. Sodium salts of fatty acids are used as
soap.[451] Pure sodium metal also has many applications, including use
in sodium-vapour lamps, which produce very efficient light compared to
other types of lighting,[452][453] and can help smooth the surface of
other metals.[454][455] Being a strong reducing agent, it is often used
to reduce many other metals, such as titanium and zirconium, from their
chlorides. Furthermore, it is very useful as a heat-exchange liquid in
fast breeder nuclear reactors due to its low melting point, viscosity,
and cross-section towards neutron absorption.[456]

Potassium compounds are often used as fertilisers[457][458] as potassium
is an important element for plant nutrition. Potassium hydroxide is a
very strong base, and is used to control the pH of various
substances.[459][460] Potassium nitrate and potassium permanganate are
often used as powerful oxidising agents.[461] Potassium superoxide is
used in breathing masks, as it reacts with carbon dioxide to give
potassium carbonate and oxygen gas. Pure potassium metal is not often
used, but its alloys with sodium may substitute for pure sodium in fast
breeder nuclear reactors.[462]

Rubidium and caesium are often used in atomic clocks.[463] Caesium
atomic clocks are extraordinarily accurate; if a clock had been made at
the time of the dinosaurs, it would be off by less than four seconds
(after 80 million years).[464] For that reason, caesium atoms are used
as the definition of the second.[465] Rubidium ions are often used in
purple fireworks,[466] and caesium is often used in drilling fluids in
the petroleum industry.[467][468]

Francium has no commercial applications,[469][470][471] but because of
francium's relatively simple atomic structure, among other things, it
has been used in spectroscopy experiments, leading to more information
regarding energy levels and the coupling constants between subatomic
particles.[472] Studies on the light emitted by laser-trapped
francium-210 ions have provided accurate data on transitions between
atomic energy levels, similar to those predicted by quantum theory.[473]


Biological role and precautions

Metals

Pure alkali metals are dangerously reactive with air and water and must
be kept away from heat, fire, oxidising agents, acids, most organic
compounds, halocarbons, plastics, and moisture. They also react with
carbon dioxide and carbon tetrachloride, so that normal fire
extinguishers are counterproductive when used on alkali metal
fires.[474] Some Class D dry powder extinguishers designed for metal
fires are effective, depriving the fire of oxygen and cooling the alkali
metal.[475]

Experiments are usually conducted using only small quantities of a few
grams in a fume hood. Small quantities of lithium may be disposed of by
reaction with cool water, but the heavier alkali metals should be
dissolved in the less reactive isopropanol.[476][477] The alkali metals
must be stored under mineral oil or an inert atmosphere. The inert
atmosphere used may be argon or nitrogen gas, except for lithium, which
reacts with nitrogen.[478] Rubidium and caesium must be kept away from
air, even under oil, because even a small amount of air diffused into
the oil may trigger formation of the dangerously explosive peroxide; for
the same reason, potassium should not be stored under oil in an
oxygen-containing atmosphere for longer than 6 months.[479][480]

Ions

Lithium_carbonate.jpg]] The bioinorganic chemistry of the alkali metal
ions has been extensively reviewed.[481] Solid state crystal structures
have been determined for many complexes of alkali metal ions in small
peptides, nucleic acid constituents, carbohydrates and ionophore
complexes.[482]

Lithium naturally only occurs in traces in biological systems and has no
known biological role, but does have effects on the body when
ingested.[483] Lithium carbonate is used as a mood stabiliser in
psychiatry to treat bipolar disorder (manic-depression) in daily doses
of about 0.5 to 2 grams, although there are side-effects.[484] Excessive
ingestion of lithium causes drowsiness, slurred speech and vomiting,
among other symptoms,[485] and poisons the central nervous system,[486]
which is dangerous as the required dosage of lithium to treat bipolar
disorder is only slightly lower than the toxic dosage.[487][488] Its
biochemistry, the way it is handled by the human body and studies using
rats and goats suggest that it is an essential trace element, although
the natural biological function of lithium in humans has yet to be
identified.[489][490]

Sodium and potassium occur in all known biological systems, generally
functioning as electrolytes inside and outside cells.[491][492] Sodium
is an essential nutrient that regulates blood volume, blood pressure,
osmotic equilibrium and pH; the minimum physiological requirement for
sodium is 500 milligrams per day.[493] Sodium chloride (also known as
common salt) is the principal source of sodium in the diet, and is used
as seasoning and preservative, such as for pickling and jerky; most of
it comes from processed foods.[494] The Dietary Reference Intake for
sodium is 1.5 grams per day,[495] but most people in the United States
consume more than 2.3 grams per day,[496] the minimum amount that
promotes hypertension;[497] this in turn causes 7.6 million premature
deaths worldwide.[498]

Potassium is the major cation (positive ion) inside animal cells,[499]
while sodium is the major cation outside animal cells.[500][501] The
concentration differences of these charged particles causes a difference
in electric potential between the inside and outside of cells, known as
the membrane potential. The balance between potassium and sodium is
maintained by ion transporter proteins in the cell membrane.[502] The
cell membrane potential created by potassium and sodium ions allows the
cell to generate an action potential—a "spike" of electrical discharge.
The ability of cells to produce electrical discharge is critical for
body functions such as neurotransmission, muscle contraction, and heart
function.[503] Disruption of this balance may thus be fatal: for
example, ingestion of large amounts of potassium compounds can lead to
hyperkalemia strongly influencing the cardiovascular system.[504][505]
Potassium chloride is used in the United States for lethal injection
executions.[506]

GoiâniaRadiationsource.gif to focus the radiation into a narrow beam.
The caesium-137 chloride radioactive source is the blue square, and
gamma rays are represented by the beam emerging from the aperture. This
was the radiation source involved in the Goiânia accident, containing
about 93 grams of caesium-137 chloride.]] Due to their similar atomic
radii, rubidium and caesium in the body mimic potassium and are taken up
similarly. Rubidium has no known biological role, but may help stimulate
metabolism,[507][508][509] and, similarly to caesium,[510][511] replace
potassium in the body causing potassium deficiency.[512][513] Partial
substitution is quite possible and rather non-toxic: a 70 kg person
contains on average 0.36 g of rubidium, and an increase in this value by
50 to 100 times did not show negative effects in test persons.[514] Rats
can survive up to 50% substitution of potassium by rubidium.[515][516]
Rubidium (and to a much lesser extent caesium) can function as temporary
cures for hypokalemia; while rubidium can adequately physiologically
substitute potassium in some systems, caesium is never able to do
so.[517] There is only very limited evidence in the form of deficiency
symptoms for rubidium being possibly essential in goats; even if this is
true, the trace amounts usually present in food are more than
enough.[518][519]

Caesium compounds are rarely encountered by most people, but most
caesium compounds are mildly toxic. Like rubidium, caesium tends to
substitute potassium in the body, but is significantly larger and is
therefore a poorer substitute.[520] Excess caesium can lead to
hypokalemia, arrythmia, and acute cardiac arrest,[521] but such amounts
would not ordinarily be encountered in natural sources.[522] As such,
caesium is not a major chemical environmental pollutant.[523] The median
lethal dose (LD₅₀) value for caesium chloride in mice is 2.3 g per
kilogram, which is comparable to the LD₅₀ values of potassium chloride
and sodium chloride.[524] Caesium chloride has been promoted as an
alternative cancer therapy,[525] but has been linked to the deaths of
over 50 patients, on whom it was used as part of a scientifically
unvalidated cancer treatment.[526]

Radioisotopes of caesium require special precautions: the improper
handling of caesium-137 gamma ray sources can lead to release of this
radioisotope and radiation injuries. Perhaps the best-known case is the
Goiânia accident of 1987, in which an improperly-disposed-of radiation
therapy system from an abandoned clinic in the city of Goiânia, Brazil,
was scavenged from a junkyard, and the glowing caesium salt sold to
curious, uneducated buyers. This led to four deaths and serious injuries
from radiation exposure. Together with caesium-134, iodine-131, and
strontium-90, caesium-137 was among the isotopes distributed by the
Chernobyl disaster which constitute the greatest risk to health.[527]
Radioisotopes of francium would presumably be dangerous as well due to
their high decay energy and short half-life, but none have been produced
in large enough amounts to pose any serious risk.[528]


Notes


References

Alkali_metals Category:Groups (periodic table) Category:Periodic table
Category:Articles containing video clips

[1] The symbols NA and K for sodium and potassium are derived from their
Latin names, _natrium_ and _kalium_; these are still the origins of the
names for the elements in some languages, such as German and Russian.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32] In the 1869 version of Mendeleev's periodic table, copper and
silver were placed in their own group, aligned with hydrogen and
mercury, while gold was tentatively placed under uranium and the
undiscovered eka-aluminium in the boron group.

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39] Adloff, Jean-Pierre; Kaufman, George B. (2005-09-25). Francium
(Atomic Number 87), the Last Discovered Natural Element . _The Chemical
Educator_ 10 (5). Retrieved on 26 March 2007.

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44] The asterisk denotes an excited state.

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95] Vanýsek, Petr (2011). “Electrochemical Series”, in _Handbook of
Chemistry and Physics: 92nd Edition_ (Chemical Rubber Company).

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99] Vanýsek, Petr (2011). “Electrochemical Series”, in _Handbook of
Chemistry and Physics: 92nd Edition_ (Chemical Rubber Company).

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]

[138]

[139]

[140]

[141]

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

[147]

[148]

[149]

[150]

[151]

[152]

[153]

[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

[165]

[166]

[167]

[168]

[169]

[170] Radioisotope Brief: Cesium-137 (Cs-137). U.S. National Center for
Environmental Health

[171]

[172]

[173]

[174]

[175]

[176]

[177]

[178]

[179]

[180]

[181]

[182]

[183]

[184]

[185]

[186]

[187]

[188]

[189]

[190]

[191]

[192]

[193]  Section 17.43, page 321

[194]

[195]

[196]

[197]

[198]

[199]

[200]

[201]

[202]

[203]

[204]

[205]

[206]

[207]

[208]

[209]

[210]

[211]

[212]

[213]

[214]

[215]

[216] Buszek, Keith R. (2001) "Sodium Amalgam" in _Encyclopedia of
Reagents for Organic Synthesis_, Wiley.

[217]

[218]

[219]

[220] Sevov, S.C. "Zintl Phases", pp. 113–132 in _Intermetallic
Compounds, Principles and Practice: Progress_, Vol. 3. Westbrook, J.H.;
Freisher, R.L.: Eds.; John Wiley & Sons. Ltd., Chichester, England

[221] S.M. Kauzlarich, Encyclopedia of Inorganic chemistry, 1994, John
Wiley & Sons,

[222]

[223]

[224]

[225]

[226]

[227]

[228] NIST Ionizing Radiation Division 2001 – Technical Highlights.
physics.nist.gov

[229]

[230]

[231]

[232]

[233]

[234]

[235]

[236]

[237]

[238]

[239]

[240] . 'Elusive Binary Compound Prepared' _Chemical & Engineering News_
80 No. 20 (20 May 2002)

[241]

[242]

[243]

[244] H.G. Von Schnering, W. Hönle _Phosphides – Solid-state Chemistry_
Encyclopedia of Inorganic Chemistry Ed. R. Bruce King (1994) John Wiley
& Sons

[245]

[246]

[247]

[248]

[249]

[250]

[251]

[252]

[253]

[254]

[255]

[256]

[257]

[258]

[259]

[260]

[261]

[262]

[263]

[264]

[265]

[266]

[267]

[268]

[269]

[270]

[271]

[272]

[273]

[274]

[275]

[276]

[277]

[278]

[279]

[280]

[281]

[282]

[283]

[284]

[285]

[286]

[287]

[288]

[289]

[290] Elschenbroich, C. "Organometallics" (2006) Wiley-VCH: Weinheim. .

[291]

[292]

[293]

[294]

[295]

[296]

[297]

[298]

[299]

[300]

[301]

[302]

[303]

[304]

[305]

[306]

[307] "Inorganic Chemistry" by Gary L. Miessler and Donald A. Tar, 6th
edition, Pearson

[308] Kumar De, Anil (2007). A Text Book of Inorganic Chemistry. New Age
International. p. 247. .

[309] "The chemistry of the Elements" by Greenwood and Earnshaw, 2nd
edition, Elsevier

[310] "Inorganic Chemistry" by Cotton and Wilkinson

[311]

[312]

[313]

[314]

[315]

[316]

[317]

[318]

[319]

[320]

[321]

[322]

[323]

[324]

[325]

[326]

[327]

[328]

[329]

[330]

[331]

[332]

[333]

[334]

[335]

[336]

[337]

[338]

[339]

[340]

[341]

[342] Nuclear scientists eye future landfall on a second 'island of
stability'. EurekAlert! (2008-04-06). Retrieved on 2016-11-25.

[343]

[344]

[345]

[346]

[347]

[348] Winter, Mark J. (1994) _Chemical Bonding_, Oxford University
Press,

[349]

[350]

[351]

[352]

[353]

[354]

[355]

[356]

[357] Huheey, J.E.; Keiter, E.A. and Keiter, R.L. (1993) _Inorganic
Chemistry: Principles of Structure and Reactivity_, 4th edition,
HarperCollins, New York, USA.

[358] James, A.M. and Lord, M.P. (1992) _Macmillan's Chemical and
Physical Data_, Macmillan, London, UK.

[359]

[360]

[361]

[362]

[363]

[364]

[365]

[366]

[367]

[368]

[369]

[370]

[371]

[372]

[373]

[374]

[375]

[376]

[377]

[378]

[379]

[380]

[381]

[382]

[383]

[384]

[385]

[386]

[387]

[388]

[389]

[390]

[391]

[392]

[393]

[394]

[395]

[396]

[397]

[398]

[399]

[400]

[401] .

[402]

[403] Russell AM & Lee KL (2005) _Structure-property relations in
nonferrous metals_. Wiley-Interscience, New York. p. 302.

[404] Deming HG (1940) _Fundamental Chemistry,_ John Wiley & Sons, New
York, pp. 705–7

[405]

[406] Bailar, J. C. (1973) _Comprehensive inorganic chemistry_, vol. 3,
p. 16.

[407]

[408]

[409]

[410]

[411]

[412]

[413]

[414]

[415]

[416]

[417]

[418]

[419]

[420]

[421]

[422]

[423]

[424]

[425] Merck Index, 9th ed., monograph 8325

[426]

[427]

[428]

[429]

[430]

[431]

[432]

[433]

[434]

[435]

[436]

[437]

[438]

[439]

[440]

[441]

[442]

[443]

[444]

[445]

[446]

[447]

[448]

[449]

[450]

[451]

[452]

[453]

[454]

[455]

[456]

[457]

[458]

[459]

[460]

[461]

[462]

[463]

[464]

[465]

[466]

[467]

[468]

[469]

[470]

[471]

[472]

[473]

[474]

[475]

[476]

[477]

[478]

[479]

[480]

[481]

[482]

[483]

[484]

[485]

[486]

[487]

[488]

[489]

[490]

[491]

[492]

[493]

[494]

[495]

[496]

[497]

[498]

[499]

[500]

[501]

[502]

[503]

[504]

[505]

[506]

[507]

[508]

[509]

[510]

[511]

[512]

[513]

[514]

[515]

[516]

[517]

[518]

[519]

[520]

[521]

[522]

[523]

[524]

[525]

[526] Wood, Leonie.

[527]

[528]