In abstract algebra, an ALTERNATIVE ALGEBRA is an algebra in which multiplication need not be associative, only alternative. That is, one must have

-   x(xy) = (xx)y
-   (yx)x = y(xx)

for all _x_ and _y_ in the algebra.

Every associative algebra is obviously alternative, but so too are some strictly non-associative algebras such as the octonions.


The associator

Alternative algebras are so named because they are the algebras for which the associator is alternating. The associator is a trilinear map given by

[_x_, _y_, _z_] = (_x__y_)_z_ − _x_(_y__z_)
. By definition, a multilinear map is alternating if it vanishes whenever two of its arguments are equal. The left and right alternative identities for an algebra are equivalent to[1]

[_x_, _x_, _y_] = 0

[_y_, _x_, _x_] = 0.
Both of these identities together imply that the associator is totally skew-symmetric. That is,

$$[x_{\sigma(1)}, x_{\sigma(2)}, x_{\sigma(3)}] = \sgn(\sigma)[x_1,x_2,x_3]$$
for any permutation σ. It follows that

[_x_, _y_, _x_] = 0
for all _x_ and _y_. This is equivalent to the _flexible identity_[2]

(_x__y_)_x_ = _x_(_y__x_).
The associator of an alternative algebra is therefore alternating. Conversely, any algebra whose associator is alternating is clearly alternative. By symmetry, any algebra which satisfies any two of:

-   left alternative identity: x(xy) = (xx)y
-   right alternative identity: (yx)x = y(xx)
-   flexible identity: (xy)x = x(yx).

is alternative and therefore satisfies all three identities.

An alternating associator is always totally skew-symmetric. The converse holds so long as the characteristic of the base field is not 2.


Examples

-   Every associative algebra is alternative.
-   The octonions form a non-associative alternative algebra, a normed division algebra of dimension 8 over the real numbers.[3]
-   More generally, any octonion algebra is alternative.

Non-examples

-   The sedenions and all higher Cayley-Dickson algebras lose alternativity.
-   All Antiassociative algebras are by definition not alternative.


Properties

ARTIN'S THEOREM states that in an alternative algebra the subalgebra generated by any two elements is associative.[4] Conversely, any algebra for which this is true is clearly alternative. It follows that expressions involving only two variables can be written unambiguously without parentheses in an alternative algebra. A generalization of Artin's theorem states that whenever three elements x, y, z in an alternative algebra associate (i.e., [x, y, z] = 0), the subalgebra generated by those elements is associative.

A corollary of Artin's theorem is that alternative algebras are power-associative, that is, the subalgebra generated by a single element is associative.[5] The converse need not hold: the sedenions are power-associative but not alternative.

The Moufang identities

-   a(x(ay)) = (axa)y
-   ((xa)y)a = x(aya)
-   (ax)(ya) = a(xy)a

hold in any alternative algebra.[6]

In a unital alternative algebra, multiplicative inverses are unique whenever they exist. Moreover, for any invertible element x and all y one has

_y_ = _x_^( − 1)(_x__y_).
This is equivalent to saying the associator [x^( − 1), x, y] vanishes for all such x and y. If x and y are invertible then xy is also invertible with inverse (xy)^( − 1) = y^( − 1)x^( − 1). The set of all invertible elements is therefore closed under multiplication and forms a Moufang loop. This _loop of units_ in an alternative ring or algebra is analogous to the group of units in an associative ring or algebra.

Kleinfeld's theorem states that any simple non-associative alternative ring is a generalized octonion algebra over its center.[7] The structure theory of alternative rings is presented in [8].


Applications

The projective plane over any alternative division ring is a Moufang plane.

The close relationship of alternative algebras and composition algebras was given by Guy Roos in 2008[9]: He shows (page 162) the relation for an algebra _A_ with unit element _e_ and an involutive anti-automorphism a ↦ a^(*) such that _a_ + _a_* and _aa_* are on the line spanned by _e_ for all _a_ in _A_. Use the notation _n_(_a_) = _aa_*. Then if _n_ is a non-singular mapping into the field of _A_, and _A_ is alternative, then (_A,n_) is a composition algebra.


See also

-   Zorn ring
-   Maltsev algebra


References

-   -


External links

-

Category:Non-associative algebras

[1] Schafer (1995) p.27

[2] Schafer (1995) p.28

[3]

[4] Schafer (1995) p.29

[5] Schafer (1995) p.30

[6]

[7] Zhevlakov, Slin'ko, Shestakov, Shirshov. (1982) p.151

[8] Zhevlakov, Slin'ko, Shestakov, Shirshov. (1982)

[9] Guy Roos (2008) "Exceptional symmetric domains", §1: Cayley algebras, in _Symmetries in Complex Analysis_ by Bruce Gilligan & Guy Roos, volume 468 of _Contemporary Mathematics_, American Mathematical Society