ANDORRA (, ;[1] ), officially the PRINCIPALITY OF ANDORRA (), also
called the PRINCIPALITY OF THE VALLEYS OF ANDORRA[2] (), is a sovereign
landlocked microstate on the Iberian Peninsula, in the eastern Pyrenees,
bordering France to the north and Spain to the south. Believed to have
been created by Charlemagne, Andorra was ruled by the Count of Urgell
until 988, when it was transferred to the Roman Catholic Diocese of
Urgell, and the present principality was formed by a charter in 1278. It
is known as a principality as it is a diarchy headed by two Princes: the
Catholic Bishop of Urgell in Catalonia, Spain, and the President of
France.

Andorra is the sixth-smallest nation in Europe, having an area of and a
population of approximately . The Andorran people are a Romance ethnic
group of originally Catalan descent.[3] Andorra is the 16th-smallest
country in the world by land and the 11th-smallest by population.[4] Its
capital, Andorra la Vella, is the highest capital city in Europe, at an
elevation of above sea level.[5] The official language is Catalan;
Spanish, Portuguese, and French are also commonly spoken.[6][7]

Tourism in Andorra sees an estimated 10.2 million visitors annually.[8]
Andorra is not a member of the European Union, but the euro is its
official currency. It has been a member of the United Nations since
1993.[9] In 2013, Andorra had the highest life expectancy in the world
at 81 years, according to the Global Burden of Disease Study.[10]


Etymology

The origin of the word _Andorra_ is unknown, although several hypotheses
have been formulated. The oldest derivation of the word _Andorra_ is
from the Greek historian Polybius (_The Histories_ III, 35, 1) who
describes the _Andosins_, an Iberian Pre-Roman tribe, as historically
located in the valleys of Andorra and facing the Carthaginian army in
its passage through the Pyrenees during the Punic Wars. The word
_Andosini_ or _Andosins_ (Ἀνδοσίνοι) may derive from the Basque _handia_
whose meaning is "big" or "giant".[11] The Andorran toponymy shows
evidence of Basque language in the area. Another theory suggests that
the word _Andorra_ may derive from the old word _Anorra_ that contains
the Basque word _ur_ (water).[12]

Another theory suggests that _Andorra_ may derive from Arabic
_al-durra_, meaning "The forest" (الدرة). When the Moors conquered the
Iberian Peninsula, the valleys of the Pyrenees were covered by large
tracts of forest, and other regions and towns, also administered by
Muslims, received this designation.[13]

Other theories suggest that the term derives from the Navarro-Aragonese
_andurrial_, which means "land covered with bushes" or "scrubland".[14]

The folk etymology holds that Charlemagne had named the region as a
reference to the Biblical Canaanite valley of _Endor_ or _Andor_ (where
the Midianites had been defeated), a name also bestowed by his heir and
son Louis le Debonnaire after defeating the Moors in the "wild valleys
of Hell".[15]


History

Prehistory

Gravats_del_Roc_de_les_Bruixes.JPG (detail)]]

_La Balma de la Margineda_, found by archaeologists at Sant Julia de
Loria, was first settled in 9,500 BC as a passing place between the two
sides of the Pyrenees. The seasonal camp was perfectly located for
hunting and fishing by the groups of hunter-gatherers from Ariege and
Segre.[16]

During the Neolithic Age, a group of people moved to the Valley of
Madriu (nowadays Natural Parc located in Escaldes-Engordany declared
UNESCO World Heritage Site) as a permanent camp in 6640 BC. The
population of the valley grew cereals, raised domestic livestock, and
developed a commercial trade with people from the Segre and Occitania.

Other archaeological deposits include the _Tombs of Segudet_ (Ordino)
and _Feixa del Moro_ (Sant Julia de Loria) both dated in 4900–4300 BC as
an example of the Urn culture in Andorra. The model of small settlements
began to evolve to a complex urbanism during the Bronze Age.
Metallurgical items of iron, ancient coins, and relicaries can be found
in the ancient sanctuaries scattered around the country.

The sanctuary of _Roc de les Bruixes_ (Stone of the Witches) is perhaps
the most important archeological complex of this age in Andorra, located
in the parish of Canillo, about the rituals of funerals, ancient
scripture and engraved stone murals.

The Iberian and Roman Andorra

Ann%C3%ADbal,_andosins.png's route (in red) during the Second Punic War.
The Iberian tribes (in green) fought against the Carthaginian army in
the Pyrenees.]]

The inhabitants of the valleys were traditionally associated with the
Iberians and historically located in Andorra as the Iberian tribe
_Andosins_ or _Andosini_ (Ἀνδοσίνους) during the 7th and 2nd centuries
BC. Influenced by Aquitanias, Basque and Iberian languages, the locals
developed some current toponyms. Early writings and documents relating
to this group of people goes back to the second century BC by the Greek
writer Polybius in his _Histories_ during the Punic Wars.[17]

Some of the most significant remains of this era are the Castle of the
_Roc d'Enclar_ (part of the early Marca Hispanica), _l'Anxiu_ in Les
Escaldes and _Roc de L'Oral_ in Encamp. The presence of Roman influence
is recorded from the 2nd century BC to the 5th century AD. The places
found with more Roman presence are in _Camp Vermell_ (Red Field) in Sant
Julia de Loria, and in some places in Encamp, as well as in the _Roc
d'Enclar_. People continued trading, mainly with wine and cereals, with
the Roman cities of Urgellet (nowaday La Seu d'Urgell) and all across
Segre through the _Via Romana Strata Ceretana_ (also known as _Strata
Confluetana_).

The Visigoths and Carolingians: the legend of Charlemagne

Charlemagne_et_Louis_le_Pieux.jpg instructing his son Louis the Pious]]

After the fall of the Roman Empire, Andorra came under the influence of
the Visigoths, not remotely from the Kingdom of Toledo, but locally from
the Diocese of Urgell. The Visigoths remained in the valleys for 200
years, during which time Christianity spread. When the Muslim Empire and
its conquest of most of the Iberian Peninsula replaced the ruling
Visigoths, Andorra was sheltered from these invaders by the Franks.

Tradition holds that _Charles the Great_ (Charlemagne) granted a charter
to the Andorran people for a contingent of five thousand soldiers under
the command of _Marc Almugaver_, in return for fighting against the
Moors near Porté-Puymorens (Cerdanya).[18]

Parr%C3%B2quies_andorra.png as depicted in the _Acta de Consagració i
Dotació de la Catedral de la Seu d'Urgell_ (839)]]

Andorra remained part of the Marca Hispanica of the Frankish Empire
being part of the territory ruled by the Count of Urgell and eventually
by the bishop of the Diocese of Urgell. Also tradition holds that it was
guaranteed by the son of Charlemagne, Louis the Pious, writing the
_Carta de Poblament_ or a local municipal charter circa 805.[19]

In 988, Borrell II, Count of Urgell, gave the Andorran valleys to the
Diocese of Urgell in exchange for land in Cerdanya.[20] Since then, the
Bishop of Urgell, based in Seu d'Urgell, has been Co-prince of
Andorra.[21]

The first document that mentions _Andorra_ as a territory is the _Acta
de Consagració i Dotació de la Catedral de la Seu d'Urgell_ (Deed of
Consecration and Endowment of the Cathedral of La Seu d'Urgell). The old
document dated from 839 depicts the six old parishes of the Andorran
valleys and therefore the administrative division of the country.

Medieval Age: The Paréages and the founding of the Co-Principality

Esgl%C3%A9sia_de_Sant_Joan_de_Caselles_-_7.jpg church, dating from the
11th century, part of the Andorran Romanesque heritage]] Before 1095,
Andorra did not have any type of military protection and the Bishop of
Urgell, who knew that the Count of Urgell wanted to reclaim the Andorran
valleys,[22] asked the Lord of Caboet for help and protection. In 1095
the Lord of Caboet and the Bishop of Urgell signed under oath a
declaration of their co-sovereignty over Andorra. Arnalda, daughter of
Arnau of Caboet, married the Viscount of Castellbò and both became
Viscounts of Castellbò and Cerdanya. Years later their daughter,
Ermessenda,[23] married Roger Bernat II, the French Count of Foix. They
became Roger Bernat II and Ermessenda I, Counts of Foix, Viscounts of
Castellbò and Cerdanya, and co-sovereigns of Andorra (shared with the
Bishop of Urgell).

In the 13th century, a military dispute arose between the Bishop of
Urgell and the Count of Foix as aftermath of the Cathar Crusade. The
conflict was resolved in 1278 with the mediation of the king of Aragon,
Pere II between the Bishop and the Count, by the signing of the first
paréage which provided that Andorra's sovereignty be shared between the
count of Foix[24] (whose title would ultimately transfer to the French
head of state) and the Bishop of Urgell, in Catalonia. This gave the
principality its territory and political form.

Casa_de_la_Vall_-_14.jpg in the capital city of Andorra la Vella]]
065_Absis_de_Sant_Miquel_d%27Engolasters.jpg church, painted by _Mestre
de Santa Coloma_ during the 12th century[25]]]

A second paréage was signed in 1288 after a dispute when the Count of
Foix ordered the construction of a castle in _Roc d'Enclar_. The
document was ratified by the noble notary Jaume Orig of Puigcerdà and
the construction of military structures in the country was prohibited.

In 1364 the political organization of the country named the figure of
the syndic (now spokesman and president of the parliament) as
representative of the Andorrans to their co-princes making possible the
creation of local departments (_comuns_, _quarts_ and _veïnats_). After
being ratified by the Bishop Francesc Tovia and the Count Jean I, the
_Consell de la Terra_ or Consell General de les Valls (General Council
of the Valleys) was founded in 1419, the second oldest parliament in
Europe. The syndic Andreu d'Alàs and the General Council organized the
creation of the Justice Courts (_La Cort de Justicia_) in 1433 with the
Co-Princes and the collection of taxes like _foc i lloc_ (literally
_fire and site_, a national tax active since then).

Although we can find remains of ecclesiastical works dating before the
9th century (_Sant Vicenç d'Enclar_ or Església de Santa Coloma),
Andorra developed exquisite Romanesque Art during the 9th through 14th
centuries, particularly in the construction of churches, bridges,
religious murals and statues of the Virgin and Child (Our Lady of
Meritxell being the most important). Nowadays, the Romanesque buildings
that form part of Andorra's cultural heritage stand out in a remarkable
way, with an emphasis on Església de Sant Esteve, Sant Joan de Caselles,
Església de Sant Miquel d'Engolasters, Sant Martí de la Cortinada and
the medieval bridges of Margineda and Escalls among many others.

While the Catalan Pyrenees were embryonic of the Catalan language at the
end of the 11th century Andorra was influenced by the appearance of that
language where it was adopted by proximity and influence even decades
before it was expanded by the rest of the Crown of Aragon.[26]

The local population based its economy during the Middle Ages in
livestock and agriculture, as well as in furs and weavers. Later, at the
end of the 11th century, the first iron foundries began to appear in
Northern Parishes like Ordino, much appreciated by the master artisans
who developed the art of the forges, an important economic activity in
the country from the 15th century.

16th to 18th centuries

Tribunal_de_Corts_d%27Andorra.JPG (High Court of Justice) inside Casa de
la Vall, the central Judiciary Court of Andorra]] In 1601 the Tribunal
de Corts (High Court of Justice) was created as a result of Huguenot
rebellions from France, Inquisition courts coming from Spain and
indigenous witchcraft experienced in the country due to the Reformation
and Counter-Reformation. With the passage of time, the co-title to
Andorra passed to the kings of Navarre. After Henry of Navarre became
King Henry IV of France, he issued an edict in 1607, that established
the head of the French state and the Bishop of Urgell as Co-Princes of
Andorra. During 1617 communal councils form the _sometent_ (popular
militia or army) to deal with the rise of _bandolerisme_ (brigandage)
and the Consell de la Terra was defined and structured in terms of its
composition, organization and competences current today .

Andorra continued with the same economic system that it had during the
12th–14th centuries with a large production of metallurgy (_fargues_, a
system similar to _Farga catalana_) and with the introduction of tobacco
circa 1692 and import trade. The fair of Andorra la Vella was ratified
by the co-princes in 1371 and 1448 being the most important annual
national festival commercially ever since.
Building_in_Ordino._Andorra_216.jpg of Rossell family in Ordino, _Casa
Rossell_, built in 1611. The family owned in 1619 also the largest
ironwork forges in Andorra as _Farga Rossell_ and _Farga del
Serrat_.[27]]] The country had a unique and experienced guild of
weavers, _Confraria de Paraires i Teixidors_, located in
Escaldes-Engordany founded in 1604 taking advantage of the thermal
waters of the area. By that time the country was characterized by the
social system of _prohoms_ (wealthy society) and _casalers_ (rest of the
population with smaller economic acquisition), deriving from the
tradition of _pubilla_ and _hereu_.

Three centuries after its foundation the Consell de la Terra located its
headquarters and the Tribunal de Corts in Casa de la Vall in 1702. The
manor house built in 1580 served as a noble fortress of the Busquets
family. Inside the parliament was placed the _Closet of the six keys_
(_Armari de les sis claus_) representative of each Andorran parish and
where the Andorran constitution and other documents and laws were kept
later on.

In both Guerra dels Segadors and Guerra de Sucesión Española conflicts,
the Andorran people (although professing to be a neutral country)
supported the Catalans who saw their rights reduced in 1716. The
reaction was the promotion of Catalan writings in Andorra, with cultural
works such as the _Book of Privileges_ (_Llibre de Privilegis de 1674_),
_Manual Digest_ (1748) by Antoni Fiter i Rossell or the _Polità andorrà_
(1763) by Antoni Puig.

19th century: the New Reform and the Andorran Question

Guillem_d%27Areny-Plandolit.png, nobleman and politician who promoted
the _New Reform_ in 1866]] After the French Revolution in 1809, Napoleon
I reestablished the Co-Principate and removed the French medieval tithe.
In 1812–13, the First French Empire annexed Catalonia during the
Peninsular War (_Guerra del francés_) and divided the region into four
départements, with Andorra as a part of the district of Puigcerdà
(département of Sègre). In 1814 a royal decree reestablished the
independence and economy of Andorra.

During this period, Andorra's late medieval institutions and rural
culture remained largely unchanged. In 1866 the syndic Guillem
d'Areny-Plandolit led the _reformist_ group in a Council General of 24
members elected by suffrage limited to heads of families. The Council
General replaced the aristocratic oligarchy that previously ruled the
state.[28] The New Reform (_Nova Reforma_ or _Pla de Reforma_) began
after ratification by both Co-Princes and established the basis of the
constitution[29] and symbols (such as the tricolor flag) of Andorra. A
new service economy arose as a demand of the valley inhabitants and
began to build infrastructure such as hotels, spa resorts, roads and
telegraph lines.

Revoluci%C3%B3_de_1881_d%27Andorra.jpg during the _Revolution of
1881_[30]]] The authorities of the Co-Princes (_veguer_) banned casinos
and betting houses throughout the country. The ban resulted in an
economic conflict for the Andorran people. The conflict led to the
so-called _Revolution of 1881_ or _Troubles of Andorra_, when
revolutionaries assaulted the house of the syndic on 8 December 1880 and
established the _Provisional Revolutionary Council_ led by Joan Pla i
Calvo and Pere Baró i Mas. The Provisional Revolutionary Council allowed
for the construction of casinos and spas by foreign companies. From 7–9
June 1881, the loyalists of Canillo and Encamp reconquered the parishes
of Ordino and Massana by establishing contact with the revolutionary
forces in Escaldes-Engordany. After a day of combat the Treaty of the
Bridge of Escalls was signed on 10 June. The Council was replaced and
new elections were held. The economic situation worsened, as the
populace was divided over the _Qüestió d'Andorra_ (the _Andorran
Question_ in relation to the Eastern Question). The struggles continued
between pro-bishops, pro-French, and nationalists based on the troubles
of Canillo in 1882 and 1885.

Andorra participated in the cultural movement of the Catalan Renaixença.
Between 1882 and 1887 the first academic schools were formed where
trilingualism coexisted with the official language, Catalan. Romantic
authors from France and Spain reported the awakening of the national
consciousness of the country. Jacint Verdaguer lived in Ordino during
the 1880s where he wrote and shared works related to the Renaixença with
writer and photographer, Joaquim de Riba. In 1848, Fromental Halévy had
already premiered the opera _Le Val d'Andorre_ to great success in
Europe, where the national consciousness of the valleys was exposed in
the romantic work during the Peninsular War.

20th and 21st century: Modernization of the country and the Constitutional Andorra

Borís_Skósyrev.jpg, briefly self-proclaimed "King of Andorra" in 1934]]
Andorra declared war on Imperial Germany during World War I, but did not
take part directly in the fighting. Some Andorrans volunteered to take
part in the conflict as part of the French Legions.[31] It remained in
an official state of belligerency until 1958 as it was not included in
the Treaty of Versailles.[32]

In 1933, France occupied Andorra following social unrest which occurred
before elections due to the _Revolution of 1933_ and the _FHASA strikes_
(_Vagues de FHASA_); the revolt led by _Joves Andorrans_ (a labour union
group related to the Spanish CNT and FAI) called for political
reforms,[33] the universal suffrage vote of all Andorrans and acted in
defense of the rights of local and foreign workers during the
construction of FHASA's hydroelectric power station in Encamp.[34] The 5
April 1933 _Joves Andorrans_ seized the Andorran Parliament.[35] These
actions were preceded by the arrival of Colonel René-Jules Baulard with
50 gendarmes and the mobilization of 200 local militias or _sometent_
led by the Síndic Francesc Cairat.[36]

On 6 July 1934, adventurer and nobleman Boris Skossyreff, with his
promise of freedoms and modernization of the country and wealth through
the establishment of a tax haven and foreign investments, received the
support of the members of the General Council to proclaim himself the
sovereign of Andorra. On 8 July 1934 Boris issued a proclamation in
Urgell, declaring himself _Boris I, King of Andorra_,[37] simultaneously
declaring war on the Bishop of Urgell and approving the King's
constitution on 10 July.[38] He was arrested by the Co-Prince and Bishop
Justí Guitart i Vilardebó and their authorities on 20 July and
ultimately expelled from Spain.[39] From 1936 until 1940, a French
military detachment of Garde Mobile led by well-known Colonel René-Jules
Baulard was garrisoned in Andorra to secure the principality against
disruption from the Spanish Civil War[40] and Francoist Spain[41] and
also face the rise of Republicanism in the aftermath of the 1933
Revolution.[42] During the Spanish Civil War the inhabitants of Andorra
welcomed refugees from both sides and many of them settled permanently
in the country thus contributing to the subsequent economic boom and the
entry into the capitalist era of Andorra.[43][44] Francoist troops
reached the Andorran border in the later stages of the war.[45]
22B_andorra_2.jpg (center). The local comite was leaded by _Francesc
Cairat_ (left), the First General Syndic with the longest regencie, from
1936 to 1960.[46]]]

During World War II, Andorra remained neutral and was an important
smuggling route between Vichy France and Francoist Spain.[47] At the
course of the war, the population, which lived between two states that
had declared to be openly fascist, criticized the passivity of the
General Council to the impediment of entry and expulsion of foreigners
or refugees, the crimes for economic interests,[48] the reduction of
rights of citizens[49] and be too close or sympathetic to
Francoism.[50][51] The General Council itself justified its political
and diplomatic actions under the survival and protection of Andorra's
sovereignty, which finally emerged from the two conflicts
unscathed.[52][53] Thus, certain groups organized themselves to help the
victims of Nazi oppression coming from Europe, while participating in
smuggling to help the country survive. Among the groups that were most
prominent there was the _Hostal Palanques Evasion Network Command_, in
contact with the British Mi6, which helped almost 400 fugitives,[54]
among whom were also Allied military personnel.[55][56] They remained
active between 1941 and 1944, with certain struggles with pro-Axis
informers and Gestapo agents within the country.[57]
23-24.10.67._De_Gaulle_en_Andorre_(1967)_-_53Fi5569.jpg in the streets
of Sant Julià de Lòria in Andorra on October 1967]]

In the capital city there was a smuggling black market network of
propaganda, culture and cinematic art not prone to totalitarian regimes,
promulgated in some places as the _Hotel Mirador_ or the _Casino
Hotel_,[58] as a meeting place for people of ideologies close to
Andorran and Spanish Republicanism, and Free France.[59] The network was
maintained after the war, when the film societies were formed, where
movies, music and books censored in Franco's Spain were imported, thus
becoming an anti-censorship attraction for the Catalan or foreign public
even within Andorra.[60] _Andorran Group_ (_Agrupament Andorrà_), an
anti-fascist organization linked to the Occitanie's French Resistance,
accused the French representative (_veguer_) of collaboration with
Nazism.[61]

The Andorran opening to the capitalist economy resulted in two axes:
mass tourism and the country's tax exemption. The first steps towards
the capitalist boom date from the 1930s, with the construction of
FHASA[62] and the creation of professional banking[63] with Banc Agrícol
(1930) and Crèdit Andorrà (1949), later with Banca Mora (1952), Banca
Cassany (1958) and SOBANCA (1960). Shortly after activities such as
skiing and shopping become a tourist attraction, with the inauguration
of ski resorts and cultural entities in the late 1930s.[64][65] All in
all, a renovated hotel industry has developed. On April 1968 a social
health insurance system was created (CASS).[66]
Andorra_-_panoramio_(2).jpg.[67][68]]]
Gilbert_Saboya_Sebastian_Kurz_(13927283877).jpg in 2014. Foreign
Minister of Austria Sebastian Kurz meets the Foreign Minister Gilbert
Saboya.]]

The Andorran Government necessarily involved planning, projection and
forecasts for the future: with the official visit of the French
co-prince Charles de Gaulle in 1967 and 1969, it was given approval for
the economic boom and national demands within the framework of human
rights and international openness.[69][70]

Andorra lived an era commonly known as _Andorran dream_[71] (in relation
to the American dream) alongside with the Trente Glorieuses: the Mass
culture rooted the country experiencing radical changes in the economy
and culture. Proof of this event was Ràdio Andorra, number one
transmitter musical radio station in Europe on this period,[72] with
guests and speakers of great importance promoting musical hits of
Chanson française, Swing, Rhythm & blues, Jazz, Rock & roll or American
Country music.[73] So much so that Andorra achieved a GDP per capita and
a life expectancy higher than the most standard countries of the current
economy.[74][75]

Given its relative isolation, Andorra has existed outside the mainstream
of European history, with few ties to countries other than France, Spain
and Portugal. In recent times, however, its thriving tourist industry
along with developments in transport and communications have removed the
country from its isolation. Since 1976 the country sees the need to
reform Andorran institutions due to the anachronisms in the field of
sovereignty, human rights and the balance of powers as well as the need
to adapt legislation to modern demands. In 1982 a first separation of
powers took place when instituting the _Govern d'Andorra_, under the
name of _Executive Board_ (_Consell Executiu_), chaired by the first
prime minister Òscar Ribas Reig with the approval of the Co-Princes.[76]
In 1989 the Principality signed an agreement with the European Economic
Community to regularize trade relations.[77]

Its political system was modernized in 1993 after the Andorran
constitutional referendum, when the constitution was drafted by the
Co-Princes and the General Council and approved on 14 March[78] by 74.2%
of voters, with a 76% turnout.[79] The first elections under the new
constitution were held later in the year.[80] The same year Andorra
became a member of the United Nations and the Council of Europe.[81]

Andorra formalized diplomatic relations with the United States in 1996
participating in the 51st UN General Assembly, a very important fact in
view of the normalization that the country aspired to. First General
Syndic Marc Forné took part on a speech in Catalan in the General
Assembly to defend the reform of the organization, and after three days
Forné took part in the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe
to defend the linguistic rights and the economy of Andorra.[82] In
mid-2006 the monetary agreement with the European Union is formalized,
which allows Andorra to use the Euro in an official way, as well as coin
its own Euro currency.[83][84]


Politics

Andorra is a parliamentary co-principality with the President of France
and the Catholic Bishop of Urgell (Catalonia, Spain) as Co-Princes. This
peculiarity makes the President of France, in his capacity as Prince of
Andorra, an elected reigning monarch, although he is not elected by a
popular vote of the Andorran people. The politics of Andorra take place
in a framework of a parliamentary representative democracy, whereby the
Head of Government is the chief executive, and of a pluriform
multi-party system.

The current Head of Government is Antoni Martí of the Democrats for
Andorra (DA). Executive power is exercised by the government.
Legislative power is vested in both government and parliament.

The Parliament of Andorra is known as the General Council. The General
Council consists of between 28 and 42 Councillors. The Councillors serve
for four-year terms, and elections are held between the 30th and 40th
days following the dissolution of the previous Council.

Casa_de_la_Vall_-_18.jpg
Casa_de_la_Vall,_Andorra_la_Vieja,_Andorra,_2013-12-30,_DD_03.JPG,
General Council headquarter since 2011, next to Casa de la Vall]]
Els_7_poetes,_Casa_de_la_Vall,_Consell_General.JPG]]

Half are elected in equal numbers by each of the seven administrative
parishes, and the other half of the Councillors are elected in a single
national constituency. Fifteen days after the election, the Councillors
hold their inauguration. During this session, the Syndic General, who is
the head of the General Council, and the Subsyndic General, his
assistant, are elected. Eight days later, the Council convenes once
more. During this session the Head of Government is chosen from among
the Councillors.

Candidates can be proposed by a minimum of one-fifth of the Councillors.
The Council then elects the candidate with the absolute majority of
votes to be Head of Government. The Syndic General then notifies the
Co-Princes, who in turn appoint the elected candidate as the Head of
Government of Andorra. The General Council is also responsible for
proposing and passing laws. Bills may be presented to the Council as
Private Members' Bills by three of the local Parish Councils jointly or
by at least one tenth of the citizens of Andorra.

The Council also approves the annual budget of the principality. The
government must submit the proposed budget for parliamentary approval at
least two months before the previous budget expires. If the budget is
not approved by the first day of the next year, the previous budget is
extended until a new one is approved. Once any bill is approved, the
Syndic General is responsible for presenting it to the Co-Princes so
that they may sign and enact it.

If the Head of Government is not satisfied with the Council, he may
request that the Co-Princes dissolve the Council and order new
elections. In turn, the Councillors have the power to remove the Head of
Government from office. After a motion of censure is approved by at
least one-fifth of the Councillors, the Council will vote and if it
receives the absolute majority of votes, the Head of Government is
removed.


Law and criminal justice

The judiciary is composed of the Magistrates Court, the Criminal Law
Court, the High Court of Andorra, and the Constitutional Court. The High
Court of Justice is composed of five judges: one appointed by the Head
of Government, one each by the Co-Princes, one by the Syndic General,
and one by the Judges and Magistrates. It is presided over by the member
appointed by the Syndic General and the judges hold office for six-year
terms.

The Magistrates and Judges are appointed by the High Court, as is the
President of the Criminal Law Court. The High Court also appoints
members of the Office of the Attorney General. The Constitutional Court
is responsible for interpreting the Constitution and reviewing all
appeals of unconstitutionality against laws and treaties. It is composed
of four judges, one appointed by each of the Co-Princes and two by the
General Council. They serve eight-year terms. The Court is presided over
by one of the Judges on a two-year rotation so that each judge at one
point will preside over the Court.


Foreign relations, defence, and security

Bruxelles_rue_de_la_Montagne_10.jpg]] Andorra does not have its own
armed forces,[85] although there is a small ceremonial army.
Responsibility for defending the nation rests primarily with France and
Spain.[86] However, in case of emergencies or natural disasters, the
_Sometent_ (an alarm) is called and all able-bodied men between 21 and
60 of Andorran nationality must serve.[87][88] This is why all
Andorrans, and especially the head of each house (usually the eldest
able-bodied man of a house) should, by law, keep a rifle, even though
the law also states that the police will offer a firearm in case of
need.[89] Andorra is a full member of the United Nations (UN), the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), and has a
special agreement with the European Union (EU).

Military

Andorra has a small army, which has historically been raised or
reconstituted at various dates, but has never in modern times amounted
to a standing army. The basic principle of Andorran defence is that all
able-bodied men are available to fight if called upon by the sounding of
the _Sometent_. Being a landlocked country, Andorra has no navy.

Prior to World War I, Andorra maintained an armed force of about 600
part-time militiamen under the supervision of a Captain (_Capità or Cap
de Sometent_) and a Lieutenant (_Desener or Lloctinent del Capità_).
This body was not liable for service outside the principality and was
commanded by two officials (_veguers_) appointed by France and the
Bishop of Urgell.[90]

Despite not being involved in any fighting during the First World War,
Andorra was technically the longest combatant, as the country was left
out of the Versailles Peace Conference, technically remaining at war
with Germany from its original declaration of war in 1914 until 24
September 1958 when Andorra officially declared peace with
Germany.[91][92]

In the modern era, the army has consisted of a very small body of
volunteers willing to undertake ceremonial duties. Uniforms and weaponry
were handed down from generation to generation within families and
communities.[93]

The army's role in internal security was largely taken over by the
formation of the Police Corps of Andorra in 1931. Brief civil disorder
associated with the elections of 1933 led to assistance being sought
from the French National Gendarmerie,[94] with a detachment resident in
Andorra for two months under the command of René-Jules Baulard.[95] The
Andorran Police was reformed in the following year, with eleven soldiers
appointed to supervisory roles.[96] The force consisted of six
Corporals, one for each parish (although there are currently seven
parishes, there were only six until 1978), plus four junior staff
officers to co-ordinate action, and a commander with the rank of major.
It was the responsibility of the six corporals, each in his own parish,
to be able to raise a fighting force from among the able-bodied men of
the parish.

Today a small, twelve-man ceremonial unit remains the only permanent
section of the _Sometent_, but all able-bodied men remain technically
available for military service,[97] with a requirement for each family
to have access to a firearm.[98] The army has not fought for more than
700 years, and its main responsibility is to present the flag of Andorra
at official ceremonial functions.[99][100] According to Marc Forné
Molné, Andorra's military budget is strictly from voluntary donations,
and the availability of full-time volunteers.[101]

In more recent times there has only been a general emergency call to the
popular army of _Sometent_ during the floods of 1982 in the Catalan
Pyrenees,[102] where 12 citizens perished in Andorra, to help the
population and establish a public order along with the Local Police
units.[103]

Police Corps

Andorra_la_Vella_-_Andorra_(3137259845).jpg patrolling the downtown area
of the capital city]] Andorra maintains a small but modern and
well-equipped internal police force, with around 240 police officers
supported by civilian assistants. The principal services supplied by the
corps are uniformed community policing, criminal detection, border
control, and traffic policing. There are also small specialist units
including police dogs, mountain rescue, and a bomb disposal team.[104]

GIPA

The _Grup d'Intervenció Policia d'Andorra_ (GIPA) is a small special
forces unit trained in counter-terrorism, and hostage recovery tasks.
Although it is the closest in style to an active military force, it is
part of the Police Corps, and not the army. As terrorist and hostage
situations are a rare threat to the country, the GIPA is commonly
assigned to prisoner escort duties, and at other times to routine
policing.[105]

Fire brigade

The _Andorran Fire Brigade_, with headquarters at Santa Coloma, operates
from four modern fire stations, and has a staff of around 120
firefighters. The service is equipped with 16 heavy appliances (fire
tenders, turntable ladders, and specialist four-wheel drive vehicles),
four light support vehicles (cars and vans) and four ambulances.[106]

Historically, the families of the six ancient parishes of Andorra
maintained local arrangements to assist each other in fighting fires.
The first fire pump purchased by the government was acquired in 1943.
Serious fires which lasted for two days in December 1959 led to calls
for a permanent fire service, and the _Andorran Fire Brigade_ was formed
on 21 April 1961.[107]

The fire service maintains full-time cover with five fire crews on duty
at any time: two at the brigade's headquarters in Santa Coloma, and one
crew at each of the other three fire stations.[108]


Geography

Andorramap.png Andorra_topographic_map-en.svg

Parishes

Andorra consists of seven parishes:

-   Escut_d'Andorra_la_Vella.svg Andorra la Vella
-   Emblem_of_Canillo.svg Canillo
-   Escut_d'Encamp.svg Encamp
-   Escut_d'Escaldes-Engordany.svg Escaldes-Engordany
-   Coat_of_Arms_of_La_Massana.svg La Massana
-   Emblem_of_Ordino.svg Ordino
-   Coat_of_Arms_of_Sant_Julià_de_Lòria.svg Sant Julià de Lòria

Physical geography

Due to its location in the eastern Pyrenees mountain range, Andorra
consists predominantly of rugged mountains, the highest being the Coma
Pedrosa at , and the average elevation of Andorra is .[109] These are
dissected by three narrow valleys in a Y shape that combine into one as
the main stream, the Gran Valira river, leaves the country for Spain (at
Andorra's lowest point of ). Andorra's land area is .

Phytogeographically, Andorra belongs to the Atlantic European province
of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the
WWF, the territory of Andorra belongs to the ecoregion of Pyrenees
conifer and mixed forests.

Climate

Andorra has alpine, continental and oceanic climates, depending on
altitude. Its higher elevation means there is, on average, more snow in
winter and it is slightly cooler in summer. The diversity of landmarks,
the different orientation of the valleys and the irregularity relief
typical of the Mediterranean climates make the country have a great
diversity of microclimates that hinder the general dominance of the high
mountain climate. The great differences of altitude in the minimum and
maximum points, together with the influence of a Mediterranean climate,
develop the climate of the Andorran Pyrenees.

When in precipitation, a global model characterized by convective and
abundant rains can be defined during spring and summer, which can last
until autumn (May, June and August are usually the rainiest months); In
winter, however, it is less rainy, except in the highlands, subject to
the influence of fronts from the Atlantic, which explains the high level
of innivation of the Andorran mountains. The temperature regime is
characterized, broadly, by a temperate summer and a long and cold
winter; in accordance with the mountainous condition of the
Principality.[110]

File:Andorra Mountains.JPG|View of Tristaina File:Pont
d'Anyós.jpg|Valira del Nord river File:Carretera de Grau Roig - Encamp -
Andorre 1.jpeg|View of Grau Roig and Valira d'Orient river File:Valls
del Comapedrosa (la Massana) - 9.jpg|View of the Coma Pedrosa valleys
File:Pas de la Case panorama.jpg|View of Pas de la Casa


Economy

Tree_map_export_2009_Andorra.jpeg Grandvalira_ski_resort,_Andorra5.jpg]]
Caldea_des_de_dins.JPG thermal spa, Escaldes-Engordany, the biggest
thermoludic center in Southern Europe]] Tourism, the mainstay of
Andorra's tiny, well-to-do economy, accounts for roughly 80% of GDP. An
estimated 10.2 million tourists visit annually,[111] attracted by
Andorra's duty-free status and by its summer and winter resorts.

One of the main sources of income in Andorra is tourism from ski resorts
which total over of ski ground. The sport brings in over 7 million
visitors annually and an estimated 340 million euros per year,
sustaining 2,000 direct and 10,000 indirect jobs at present since
2007.[112]

The banking sector, with its tax haven status, also contributes
substantially to the economy (the financial and insurance sector
accounts for approximately 19% of GDP[113]). The financial system
comprises five banking groups,[114] one specialised credit entity, 8
investment undertaking management entities, 3 asset management companies
and 29 insurance companies, 14 of which are branches of foreign
insurance companies authorised to operate in the principality.[115]

Agricultural production is limited, only 2% of the land is arable, and
most food has to be imported. Some tobacco is grown locally. The
principal livestock activity is domestic sheep raising. Manufacturing
output consists mainly of cigarettes, cigars, and furniture. Andorra's
natural resources include hydroelectric power, mineral water, timber,
iron ore, and lead.[116]

Andorra is not a member of the European Union, but enjoys a special
relationship with it, such as being treated as an EU member for trade in
manufactured goods (no tariffs) and as a non-EU member for agricultural
products. Andorra lacked a currency of its own and used both the French
franc and the Spanish peseta in banking transactions until 31 December
1999, when both currencies were replaced by the EU's single currency,
the euro. Coins and notes of both the franc and the peseta remained
legal tender in Andorra until 31 December 2002. Andorra negotiated to
issue its own euro coins, beginning in 2014.

Andorra has traditionally had one of the world's lowest unemployment
rates. In 2009 it stood at 2.9%.[117]

Andorra has long benefited from its status as a tax haven, with revenues
raised exclusively through import tariffs. However, during the European
sovereign-debt crisis of the 21st century, its tourist economy suffered
a decline, partly caused by a drop in the prices of goods in Spain,
which undercut Andorran duty-free shopping. This led to a growth in
unemployment. On 1 January 2012, a business tax of 10% was
introduced,[118] followed by a sales tax of 2% a year later, which
raised just over 14 million euros in its first quarter.[119]

On 31 May 2013, it was announced that Andorra intended to legislate for
the introduction of an income tax by the end of June, against a
background of increasing dissatisfaction with the existence of tax
havens among EU members.[120] The announcement was made following a
meeting in Paris between the Head of Government Antoni Marti and the
French President and Prince of Andorra, François Hollande. Hollande
welcomed the move as part of a process of Andorra "bringing its taxation
in line with international standards".[121]


Demographics

Els_Cortals_d'Encamp_-_1.jpg, as seen from the _Vall dels Cortals_]]

Population

The population of Andorra is estimated at (). The Andorrans are a
Romance ethnic group of originally Catalan descent.[122] The population
has grown from 5,000 in 1900.

Two-thirds of residents lack Andorran nationality and do not have the
right to vote in communal elections. Moreover, they are not allowed to
be elected as prime minister[123] or to own more than 33% of the capital
stock of a privately held company.[124][125][126][127]

Languages

The historic and official language is Catalan, a Romance language. The
Andorran government encourages the use of Catalan. It funds a Commission
for Catalan Toponymy in Andorra (Catalan: _la Comissió de Toponímia
d'Andorra_), and provides free Catalan classes to assist immigrants.
Andorran television and radio stations use Catalan.

Because of immigration, historical links, and close geographic
proximity, Spanish, Portuguese and French are also commonly spoken. Most
Andorran residents can speak one or more of these, in addition to
Catalan. English is less commonly spoken among the general population,
though it is understood to varying degrees in the major tourist resorts.
Andorra is one of only four European countries (together with France,
Monaco, and Turkey)[128] that have never signed the Council of Europe
Framework Convention on National Minorities.[129]

According to the _Observatori Social d'Andorra_, the linguistic usage in
Andorra is as follows:[130]

  Mother tongue                    %
  -------------------------------- -------
  Catalan                          38.8%
  Spanish                          35.4%
  Portuguese                       15%
  French                           5.4%
  Others                           5.5%
  2005 3 PoliticaLinguistica.pdf

Religion

The population of Andorra is predominantly (88.2%) Catholic.[131] Their
patron saint is Our Lady of Meritxell. Though it is not an official
state religion, the constitution acknowledges a special relationship
with the Catholic Church, offering some special privileges to that
group. Other Christian denominations include the Anglican Church, the
Unification Church, the New Apostolic Church, and Jehovah's Witnesses.
The small Muslim community is primarily made up of North African
immigrants.[132] There is a small community of Hindus and
Bahá'ís,[133][134] and roughly 100 Jews live in Andorra.[135] (See
History of the Jews in Andorra.)


Statistics

Largest cities


Education

Schools

Children between the ages of 6 and 16 are required by law to have
full-time education. Education up to secondary level is provided free of
charge by the government.

There are three systems of school, Andorran, French and Spanish, which
use Catalan, French and Spanish languages respectively, as the main
language of instruction. Parents may choose which system their children
attend. All schools are built and maintained by Andorran authorities,
but teachers in the French and Spanish schools are paid for the most
part by France and Spain. 39% of Andorran children attend Andorran
schools, 33% attend French schools, and 28% Spanish schools.

University of Andorra

The Universitat d'Andorra (UdA) is the state public university and is
the only university in Andorra. It was established in 1997. The
university provides first-level degrees in nursing, computer science,
business administration, and educational sciences, in addition to higher
professional education courses. The only two graduate schools in Andorra
are the Nursing School and the School of Computer Science, the latter
having a PhD programme.

Virtual Studies Centre

The geographical complexity of the country as well as the small number
of students prevents the University of Andorra from developing a full
academic programme, and it serves principally as a centre for virtual
studies, connected to Spanish and French universities. The Virtual
Studies Centre (_Centre d'Estudis Virtuals_) at the University runs
approximately twenty different academic degrees at both undergraduate
and postgraduate levels in fields including tourism, law, Catalan
philology, humanities, psychology, political sciences, audiovisual
communication, telecommunications engineering, and East Asia studies.
The Centre also runs various postgraduate programmes and
continuing-education courses for professionals.


Transport

Pirineus_-_la_Seu_d'Urgell_airport.jpg, located 12 km away from Andorra,
in Montferrer i Castellbò (Catalonia, Eastern Spain)]]

Until the 20th century, Andorra had very limited transport links to the
outside world, and development of the country was affected by its
physical isolation. Even now, the nearest major airports at Toulouse and
Barcelona are both three hours' drive from Andorra.

Andorra has a road network of , of which is unpaved. The two main roads
out of Andorra la Vella are the CG-1 to the Spanish border, and the CG-2
to the French border via the Envalira Tunnel near El Pas de la
Casa.[136] Bus services cover all metropolitan areas and many rural
communities, with services on most major routes running half-hourly or
more frequently during peak travel times. There are frequent
long-distance bus services from Andorra to Barcelona and Toulouse, plus
a daily tour from the former city. Bus services are mostly run by
private companies, but some local ones are operated by the government.

AGC_Z_27500.jpg (_La Tor de Querol_), one of the two stations serving
Andorra. Andorra has no railways, although the line connecting
Latour-de-Carol and Toulouse, which in turn connects to France's TGVs at
Toulouse, runs within of the Andorran border.]]

There are no airports for fixed-wing aircraft within Andorra's borders
but there are, however, heliports in La Massana (Camí Heliport), Arinsal
and Escaldes-Engordany with commercial helicopter services[137][138] and
an airport located in the neighbouring Spanish comarca of Alt Urgell,
south of the Andorran-Spanish border.[139] Since July 2015, Andorra–La
Seu d'Urgell Airport has operated commercial flights to Madrid and Palma
de Mallorca, and is the main hub for Air Andorra and Andorra Airlines.
As of 11 July 2018, there are no regular commercial flights at the
airport.

Nearby airports located in Spain and France provide access to
international flights for the principality. The nearest airports are at
Perpignan, France ( from Andorra) and Lleida, Spain ( from Andorra). The
largest nearby airports are at Toulouse, France ( from Andorra) and
Barcelona, Spain ( from Andorra). There are hourly bus services from
both Barcelona and Toulouse airports to Andorra.

The nearest railway station is L'Hospitalet-près-l'Andorre east of
Andorra which is on the -gauge line from Latour-de-Carol () southeast of
Andorra, to Toulouse and on to Paris by the French high-speed trains.
This line is operated by the SNCF. Latour-de-Carol has a scenic
trainline to Villefranche-de-Conflent, as well as the SNCF's gauge line
connecting to Perpignan, and the RENFE's -gauge line to
Barcelona.[140][141] There are also direct Intercités de Nuit trains
between L'Hospitalet-près-l'Andorre and Paris on certain dates.[142]


Media and telecommunications

RTVA_logotip.png, the public service television and radio broadcaster in
the Principality of Andorra]] Andorra_Telecom_2019_logo.svg, the
national telecom company in the Principality of Andorra]]

In Andorra, mobile and fixed telephone and internet services are
operated exclusively by the Andorran national telecommunications
company, SOM, also known as Andorra Telecom (STA). The same company also
manages the technical infrastructure for national broadcasting of
digital television and radio.[143] In 2010 Andorra became the first
country to provide a direct optical fiber link to all homes (FTTH) and
businesses.[144]

The first commercial radio station to broadcast was Radio Andorra, which
was active from 1939 to 1981.[145][146][147] On 12 October 1989, the
General Council established radio and television as essential public
services creating and managing the entity _ORTA_, becoming on 13 April
2000, in the public company _Ràdio i Televisió d'Andorra_ (RTVA).[148]
In 1990, the public radio was founded on the _Radio Nacional d'Andorra_.
As an autochthonous television channel, there is only the national
public television network _Andorra Televisió_, created in 1995.[149]
Additional TV and radio stations from Spain and France are available via
digital terrestrial television and IPTV.[150]

There are three national newspapers, _Diari d'Andorra_, _El Periòdic
d'Andorra_, and _Bondia_ as well as several local newspapers.[151] The
history of the Andorran press begins in the period between 1917 and 1937
with the appearance of several periodicals papers such as _Les Valls
d'Andorra_ (1917), _Nova Andorra_ (1932) and _Andorra Agrícola_
(1933).[152] In 1974, the _Poble Andorrà_ became the first regular
newspaper in Andorra.[153] There is also an amateur radio society[154]
and a news agency, _ANA_, with independent management.[155]


Culture

The official and historic language is Catalan. Thus the culture is
Catalan, with its own specificity.

Andorra is home to folk dances like the _contrapàs_ and _marratxa_,
which survive in Sant Julià de Lòria especially. Andorran folk music has
similarities to the music of its neighbours, but is especially Catalan
in character, especially in the presence of dances such as the sardana.
Other Andorran folk dances include _contrapàs_ in Andorra la Vella and
_Saint Anne's dance_ in Escaldes-Engordany. Andorra's national holiday
is Our Lady of Meritxell Day, 8 September.[156]

Among the most important festivals and traditions are the Canólich
Gathering in May, the _Roser d'Ordino_ in July, the _Meritxell Day_
(National Day of Andorra), the Andorra la Vella Fair, the Sant Jordi
Day, the _Santa Llúcia Fair_, the Festivity from _La Candelera_ to
Canillo, the Carnival of Encamp, the _sung of caramelles_, the Festivity
of Sant Esteve and the _Festa del Poble_.[157][158]

In popular folklore, the best-known Andorran legends are the legend of
Charlemagne, according to which this Frankish King would have founded
the country, the White Lady of Auvinyà, the Buner d'Ordino, the legend
of Engolasters Lake and the legend of Our Lady of Meritxell.

Andorran gastronomy is mainly Catalan, although it has also adopted
other elements of French and Italian cuisines. The cuisine of the
country has similar characteristics with the neighbors of the Cerdanya
and the Alt Urgell, with whom it has a strong cultural ties. Andorra's
cuisine is marked by its nature as mountain valleys. Typical dishes of
the country are the quince all-i-oli, the duck with winter pear, the
lamb in the oven with nuts, pork _civet_, the _massegada_ cake, the
escarole with pear trees, confited duck and mushrooms, escudella,
spinach with raisins and pine nuts, jelly marmalade, stuffed _murgues_
(mushrooms) with pork, dandelion salad and the Andorran trout of river.
To drink, the mulled wine and beer are also popular.[159] Some of the
dishes are very common in the mountainous regions of Catalonia, such as
trinxat, embotits, cooked snails, rice with mushrooms, mountain rice and
mató.[160]

Pre-Romanesque and Romanesque art are one of the most important artistic
manifestations and characteristics of the Principality. The Romanesque
one allows to know the formation of the parochial communities, the
relations of (social and political) power and the national culture.
There are a total of forty Romanesque churches that stand out as being
small austere ornamentation constructions, as well as bridges,
fortresses and manor houses of the same period.[161][162]

Summer solstice fire festivals in the Pyrenees was included as UNESCO
Intangible cultural heritage in 2015.[163] Also the
Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley became Andorra's first, and to date its
only, UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2004, with a small extension in
2006.[164][165]

File:HPIM0309.JPG%7CAndorran flag on balcony, Ordino
File:Anne-Benoîte-Louise Lavoye in Halévy's Le Val d'Andorre.jpg|Folk
costume (Le val d'Andorre) File:Vall del Madriu-Perafita-Claror -
86.jpg|Grandalla flower, national symbol File:Vall del
Madriu-Perafita-Claror - 68.jpg|View of Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley,
UNESCO World Heritage Site File:Altar from Sant Romà de Vila - Google
Art Project.jpg|Altar of Sant Romà de Vila File:Església de Santa Coloma
- 10.jpg|Santa Coloma d'Andorra


Sports

Andorra is famous for the practice of winter sports. Popular sports
played in Andorra include football, rugby union, basketball, and roller
hockey.

For roller hockey, Andorra usually plays in CERH Euro Cup and in FIRS
Roller Hockey World Cup. In 2011, Andorra was the host country to the
2011 European League Final Eight.

The country is represented in association football by the Andorra
national football team. However, the team has had little success
internationally because of Andorra's small population.[166] Football is
governed in Andorra by the Andorran Football Federation - founded in
1994, it organizes the national competitions of association football
(Primera Divisió, Copa Constitució and Supercopa) and futsal. Andorra
was admitted to UEFA and FIFA in the same year, 1996. FC Andorra, a club
based in Andorra la Vella founded in 1942, compete in the Spanish
football league system.

Rugby is a traditional sport in Andorra, mainly influenced by the
popularity in southern France. The Andorra national rugby union team,
nicknamed "_Els Isards_", has impressed on the international stage in
rugby union and rugby sevens.[167] VPC Andorra XV is a rugby team based
in Andorra la Vella actually playing in the French championship.

Basketball popularity has increased in the country since the 1990s, when
the Andorran team BC Andorra played in the top league of Spain (Liga
ACB).[168] After 18 years the club returned to the top league in
2014.[169]

Other sports practised in Andorra include cycling, volleyball, judo,
Australian Rules football, handball, swimming, gymnastics, tennis, and
motorsports. In 2012, Andorra raised its first national cricket team and
played a home match against the Dutch Fellowship of Fairly Odd Places
Cricket Club, the first match played in the history of Andorra at an
altitude of .[170]

Andorra first participated at the Olympic Games in 1976. The country has
also appeared in every Winter Olympic Games since 1976. Andorra competes
in the Games of the Small States of Europe, being twice the host country
in 1991 and 2005.

As one of the Catalan Countries, Andorra is home to a team of
castellers, or Catalan human tower builders. The , based in the town of
Santa Coloma d'Andorra, are recognized by the , the governing body of
castells.

File:Laure Soulie 3.jpg|Laure Soulié, Olympic biathlete File:Cycling in
Andorra.jpg|_Volta als Ports d'Andorra_, the national road cycling tour
File:Estadi Comunal Vella.jpg|Estadi Comunal d'Andorra la Vella


See also

-   Index of Andorra-related articles
-   Outline of Andorra
-   Bibliography of Andorra

{{-}}


References


Bibliography

-   -   -   -   -


External links

-   Govern d'Andorra Official governmental site
-   -   Portals to the World from the United States Library of Congress
-   Andorra from _UCB Libraries GovPubs_
-   -   Andorra from the BBC News
-   Andorra – Guía, turismo y de viajes
-   History of Andorra: Primary Documents from _EuroDocs_
-   A New Path for Andorra – slideshow by _The New York Times_
-   -

Andorra Category:Diarchies Category:Duty-free zones of Europe
Category:French-speaking countries and territories Category:Iberian
Peninsula Category:Landlocked countries Category:Member states of the
Council of Europe Category:Member states of the Organisation
internationale de la Francophonie Category:Member states of the United
Nations Category:Monarchies of Europe Category:Països Catalans
Category:Prince-bishoprics Category:Pyrenees Category:Romance countries
and territories Category:Southwestern European countries
Category:Spanish-speaking countries and territories Category:Special
economic zones Category:States and territories established in 1278
Category:1278 establishments in Europe Category:Southern European
countries Category:Principalities Category:Countries in Europe

[1]

[2] Funk and Wagnalls Encyclopedia, 1993

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11] _Diccionari d'Història de Catalunya_; ed. 62; Barcelona; 1998; ; p.
42; entrada "Andorra"

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28] Page 966, Volume 1, Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition
1910–1911

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62] revistes.iec.cat/index.php/TSCG/article/download/37437/37420

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78] Nohlen, D & Stöver, P (2010) _Elections in Europe: A data
handbook_, p160

[79] Nohlen & Stöver, p162

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109] Atlas of Andorra (1991), Andorran Government. .

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131] PEW 2011. Pewforum.org (2011-12-19). Retrieved on 2015-12-30.

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]

[138] 1

[139]

[140]

[141]

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

[147]

[148]

[149]

[150]

[151]

[152]

[153]

[154] Unió de Radioaficionats Andorra. Ura.ad. Retrieved on 2015-12-30.

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

[165]

[166]

[167] 2

[168]

[169]

[170]