ANDRE KIRK AGASSI ( ;[1][2] born April 29, 1970) is an American retired
professional tennis player and former world No. 1 whose career spanned
from the late 1980s to the mid-2000s.[3] In singles, Agassi is an
eight-time Grand Slam champion and a 1996 Olympic gold medalist, as well
as being a runner-up in seven other Grand Slam tournaments. During the
Open Era, Agassi was the first male player to win four Australian Open
titles, a record that was later surpassed by Novak Djokovic when he won
his fifth title in 2015, and then by Roger Federer in 2017. Agassi is
one of five male singles players to achieve the Career Grand Slam in the
Open Era and one of eight in history,[4][5] the first of two to achieve
the Career Golden Slam (Career Grand Slam and Olympic Gold Medal, the
other being Rafael Nadal), and the only man to win the Career Golden
Slam and the ATP Tour World Championships: a distinction dubbed as a
"Career Super Slam" by _Sports Illustrated_.[6]

Agassi was the first male player to win all four Grand Slam tournaments
on three different surfaces (hard, clay and grass), and the last
American male to win both the French Open (in 1999)[7] and the
Australian Open (in 2003).[8] He also won 17 ATP Masters Series titles
and was part of the winning Davis Cup teams in 1990, 1992 and 1995.[9]
Agassi reached the world No. 1 ranking for the first time in 1995 but
was troubled by personal issues during the mid-to-late 1990s and sank to
No. 141 in 1997, prompting many to believe that his career was over.[10]
Agassi returned to No. 1 in 1999 and enjoyed the most successful run of
his career over the next four years. During his 20-plus year tour
career, Agassi was known by the nickname "The Punisher".[11][12][13][14]

After suffering from sciatica caused by two bulging discs in his back, a
spondylolisthesis (vertebral displacement) and a bone spur that
interfered with the nerve, Agassi retired from professional tennis on
September 3, 2006, after losing in the third round of the US Open to
Benjamin Becker. He is the founder of the Andre Agassi Charitable
Foundation,[15] which has raised over $60 million for at-risk children
in Southern Nevada.[16] In 2001, the Foundation opened the Andre Agassi
College Preparatory Academy in Las Vegas, a K-12 public charter school
for at-risk children.[17] He has been married to fellow tennis player
Steffi Graf since 2001.


1970–1985: Early life

Andre Agassi was born in Las Vegas, Nevada to Emmanuel "Mike" Agassi, a
former Olympic boxer from Iran[18] and Elizabeth "Betty" Agassi (née
Dudley).[19][20] His father is of Armenian and Assyrian
heritage.[21][22][23][24][25] One of his ancestors changed his surname
from Armenian Aghassian to less noticeable Agassi to avoid
persecution.[26] Andre Agassi's mother, Betty, is a breast cancer
survivor. He has three older siblings – Rita (last wife to Pancho
Gonzales), Philip and Tami.[27][28] Andre was given the middle name Kirk
after Kirk Kerkorian, an Armenian American billionaire. Agassi, a waiter
at Tropicana Las Vegas, met Kerkorian in 1963.[29]

Agassi at the age of 12 (with his good friend and doubles partner Roddy
Parks) won the 1982 National Indoor Boys 14s Doubles Championship in
Chicago. Agassi describes more of his memorable experiences and juvenile
pranks with Roddy in his book _Open_.[30]

At the age of 13, Agassi was sent to Nick Bollettieri's Tennis Academy
in Florida.[31] He was meant to stay for only three months, because that
was all his father could afford. After thirty minutes of watching Agassi
play, Bollettieri, deeply impressed by his talent, called Mike and said:
"Take your check back. He's here for free."[32] Agassi then dropped out
of school in the ninth grade to pursue a full-time tennis career.[33]


International tennis career biography

1986–1993: Breakthrough and the first major title

Agassi_in_argentina.jpg Agassi turned professional at the age of 16 and
competed in his first tournament at La Quinta, California. He won his
first match against John Austin, but then lost his second match to Mats
Wilander. By the end of 1986, Agassi was ranked No. 91.[34] He won his
first top-level singles title in 1987 at the Sul American Open in
Itaparica[35] and ended the year ranked No. 25.[36] He won six
additional tournaments in 1988 (Memphis, U.S. Men's Clay Court
Championships, Forest Hills WCT, Stuttgart Outdoor, Volvo International
and Livingston Open),[37] and, by December of that year, he had
surpassed US$1 million in career prize money after playing in just 43
tournaments—the fastest anyone in history had reached that level.[38]
During 1988, he also set the open-era record for most consecutive
victories by a male teenager (a record that stood for 17 years until
Rafael Nadal broke it in 2005).[39] His year-end ranking was No. 3,
behind second-ranked Ivan Lendl and top-ranked Mats Wilander. Both the
Association of Tennis Professionals and _Tennis_ magazine named Agassi
the Most Improved Player of the Year for 1988.[40]

In addition to not playing the Australian Open (which later became his
best Grand Slam event) for the first eight years of his career, Agassi
chose not to play at Wimbledon from 1988 through 1990 and publicly
stated that he did not wish to play there because of the event's
traditionalism, particularly its "predominantly white" dress code to
which players at the event are required to conform.

Strong performances on the tour meant that Agassi was quickly tipped as
a future Grand Slam champion. While still a teenager, he reached the
semifinals of both the French Open and the US Open in 1988 and made the
US Open semifinals in 1989. He began the 1990s with a series of
near-misses. He reached his first Grand Slam final in 1990 at the French
Open, where he was favored before losing in four sets to Andrés Gómez,
which he later attributed in his book to worrying about his wig falling
off during the match.[41] He reached his second Grand Slam final of the
year at the US Open, defeating defending champion Boris Becker in the
semifinals. His opponent in the final was Pete Sampras; a year earlier,
Agassi had crushed Sampras, after which time he told his coach that he
felt bad for Sampras because he was never going to make it as a pro.
Agassi lost the US Open final to Sampras in three sets.[42] The rivalry
between these two American players became the biggest one in tennis over
the rest of the decade. Agassi ended 1990 on high note as he helped the
United States win its first Davis Cup in 8 years and won his only Tennis
Masters Cup, beating reigning Wimbledon champion Stefan Edberg in the
final.

In 1991, Agassi reached his second consecutive French Open final, where
he faced fellow Bollettieri Academy alumnus Jim Courier. Courier emerged
the victor in a five-set final. Agassi decided to play at Wimbledon in
1991, leading to weeks of speculation in the media about the clothes he
would wear. He eventually emerged for the first round in a completely
white outfit.[43] He reached the quarterfinals on that occasion, losing
in five sets to David Wheaton.

Agassi's Grand Slam tournament breakthrough came at Wimbledon, not at
the French Open or the US Open, where he had previously enjoyed success.
In 1992, he defeated Goran Ivanišević in a five-set final.[44][45] Along
the way, Agassi overcame two former Wimbledon champions: Boris Becker
and John McEnroe. No other baseliner would triumph at Wimbledon until
Lleyton Hewitt ten years later. Agassi was named the BBC Overseas Sports
Personality of the Year in 1992. Agassi once again played on the United
States' Davis Cup winning team in 1992. It was their second Davis cup
title in three years.

In 1993, Agassi won the only doubles title of his career, at the
Cincinnati Masters, partnered with Petr Korda. He missed much of the
early part of that year due to injuries. Although he made the
quarterfinals in his Wimbledon title defense, he lost to eventual
champion and No. 1 Pete Sampras in five sets. Agassi lost in the first
round at the US Open to Thomas Enqvist and required wrist surgery late
in the year.

1994–1997: Rise to the top, Olympic Gold and the fall

With new coach Brad Gilbert on board, Agassi began to employ more of a
tactical, consistent approach, which fueled his resurgence. He started
slowly in 1994, losing in the first week at the French Open and
Wimbledon. Nevertheless, he emerged during the hard-court season,
winning the Canadian Open. His comeback culminated at the 1994 US Open
with a five-set fourth-round victory against Michael Chang. He then
became the first man to capture the US Open as an unseeded player,
beating Michael Stich in the final.[46] Along the way, he beat 5 seeded
players.

In 1995, Agassi shaved his balding head, breaking with his old "image is
everything" style. He competed in the 1995 Australian Open (his first
appearance at the event) and won, beating Sampras in a four-set
final.[47] Agassi and Sampras met in five tournament finals in 1995, all
on hardcourt, with Agassi winning three. Agassi won three Masters Series
events in 1995 (Cincinnati, Key Biscayne, and the Canadian Open) and
seven titles total.[48] He compiled a career-best 26-match winning
streak during the summer hard-court circuit, with the last victory being
in an intense late night four-set semifinal of the US Open against Boris
Becker. The streak ended the next day when Agassi lost the final to
Sampras.

Agassi reached the world No. 1 ranking for the first time in April 1995.
He held that ranking until November, for a total of 30 weeks. Agassi
skipped most of the fall indoor season which allowed Sampras to surpass
him and finish ranked No. 1 at the year-end ranking. In terms of
win/loss record, 1995 was Agassi's best year. He won 73 and lost 9
matches, and was also once again a key player on the United States'
Davis Cup winning team—the third and final Davis Cup title of his
career.

1996 was a less successful year for Agassi, as he failed to reach any
Grand Slam final. He suffered two early-round losses to Chris Woodruff
and Doug Flach at the French Open and Wimbledon, respectively, and lost
to Chang in straight sets in the Australian and US Open semifinals. At
the time, Agassi blamed the Australian Open loss on the windy
conditions, but later said in his biography that he had lost the match
on purpose, as he did not want to play Boris Becker, whom he would have
faced in that final. The high point for Agassi was winning the men's
singles gold medal at the Olympic Games in Atlanta, beating Sergi
Bruguera of Spain in the final.[49] Agassi also successfully defended
his singles titles in Cincinnati and Key Biscayne.

1997 was the low point of Agassi's career. His wrist injury resurfaced,
and he played only 24 matches during the year. He later confessed that
he started using crystal methamphetamine at that time, allegedly on the
urging of a friend.[50] He failed an ATP drug test, but wrote a letter
claiming the same friend had spiked a drink. The ATP dropped the failed
drug test as a warning. In his autobiography, Agassi admitted that the
letter was a lie.[51] He quit the drug soon after. At this time Agassi
was also in a failing marriage with actress Brooke Shields and had lost
interest in the game.[52] He won no top-level titles, and his ranking
sank to No. 141 on November 10, 1997, prompting many to believe that his
run as one of the sport's premier competitors was over and he would
never again win any significant championships.[53]

1998–2003: Return to glory and Career Super Slam

Andre_Agassi_1999.jpg In 1998, Agassi began a rigorous conditioning
program and worked his way back up the rankings by playing in Challenger
Series tournaments, a circuit for pro players ranked outside the world's
top 50. After returning to top physical and mental shape, Agassi
recorded the most successful period of his tennis career and also played
classic matches in that period against Pete Sampras and Patrick Rafter.

In 1998, Agassi won five titles and leapt from No. 110 to No. 6, the
highest jump into the top 10 made by any player during a calendar
year.[54] At Wimbledon, he had an early loss in the second round to
Tommy Haas. He won five titles in ten finals and was runner-up at the
Masters Series tournament in Key Biscayne, losing to Marcelo Ríos, who
became No. 1 as a result. At the year end he was awarded the ATP Most
Improved Player of the Year for the second time in his career (the first
being 10 years earlier in 1988).

Agassi entered the history books in 1999 when he came back from two sets
to love down to beat Andrei Medvedev in a five-set French Open final,
becoming, at the time, only the fifth male player (joining Rod Laver,
Fred Perry, Roy Emerson and Don Budge—these have since been joined by
Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, and Novak Djokovic) to win all four Grand
Slam singles titles during his career. Only Laver, Agassi, Federer,
Nadal and Djokovic have achieved this feat during the open era. This win
also made him the first (of only four, the next being Federer, Nadal and
Djokovic respectively) male player in history to have won all four Grand
Slam titles on three different surfaces (clay, grass and hard courts).
Agassi also became the only male player to win the Career Super Slam,
consisting of all four Grand Slam tournaments plus an Olympic gold medal
in singles and a Year-End Championship.[55]

Agassi followed his 1999 French Open victory by reaching the Wimbledon
final, where he lost to Sampras in straight sets.[56] He rebounded from
his Wimbledon defeat by winning the US Open, beating Todd Martin in five
sets (rallying from a two sets to one deficit) in the final. Overall
during the year Agassi won 5 titles including two majors and the ATP
Masters Series in Paris, where he beat Marat Safin. Agassi ended 1999 as
the No. 1, ending Sampras's record of six consecutive year-ending top
rankings (1993–98).[57] This was the only time Agassi ended the year at
No. 1.

He began the next year by capturing his second Australian Open title,
beating Sampras in a five-set semifinal and Yevgeny Kafelnikov in a
four-set final.[58] He was the first male player to have reached four
consecutive Grand Slam finals since Rod Laver achieved the Grand Slam in
1969.{{#tag:ref|Roger Federer has since surpassed this feat, reaching
ten consecutive Grand Slam finals from 2005–2007.|group=lower-alpha}} At
the time, Agassi was also only the fourth player since Laver to be the
reigning champion of three of four Grand Slam events, missing only the
Wimbledon title.{{#tag:ref|Pete Sampras held the 1993 Wimbledon, 1993 US
Open and 1994 Australian Open titles simultaneously. Jimmy Connors
(1974), Roger Federer (2004, 2006 and 2007) and Novak Djokovic (2011)
won those three Majors in the same year, although Connors' Grand Slam
titles were all played on grass courts. Mats Wilander won all but
Wimbledon in 1988 during his similar rise to the year-end No. 1. Rafael
Nadal won the French Open and Wimbledon "Channel Slam" (2008) and 2009
Australian Open, before replicating the Channel Slam alongside winning
the US Open in 2010.|group=lower-alpha}}. 2000 also saw Agassi reach the
semifinals at Wimbledon, where he lost in five sets to Rafter in a match
considered by many to be one of the best ever at Wimbledon.[59] At the
inaugural Tennis Masters Cup in Lisbon, Agassi reached the final after
defeating Marat Safin in the semifinals to end the Russian's hopes to
become the youngest No. 1 in the history of tennis. Agassi then lost to
Gustavo Kuerten in the final, allowing Kuerten to be crowned year-end
No. 1.

Agassi opened 2001 by successfully defending his Australian Open title
with a straight-sets final win over Arnaud Clément.[60] En route, he
beat a cramping Rafter in five sets in front of a sell-out crowd in what
turned out to be the Aussie's last Australian Open. At Wimbledon, they
met again in the semifinals, where Agassi lost another close match to
Rafter, 8–6 in the fifth set. In the quarterfinals at the US Open,
Agassi lost a 3-hour, 33 minute epic match[61] with Sampras, 7–6, 6–7,
6–7, 6–7,[62] with no breaks of serve during the 52-game match. Despite
the setback, Agassi finished 2001 ranked No. 3, becoming the only male
tennis player to finish a year ranked in the top 3 in three different
decades[63] (1980s, 1990s, 2000s). He was also the oldest player at the
time (age 31) to finish in the top three since 32-year-old Connors
finished at No. 2 in 1984.[64]

2002 opened with disappointment for Agassi, as injury forced him to skip
the Australian Open, where he was a two-time defending champion. Agassi
recovered from the injury and later that year defended his Key Biscayne
title beating then rising Roger Federer in a four-set final. The last
duel between Agassi and Sampras came in the final of the US Open, which
Sampras won in four sets and left Sampras with a 20–14 edge in their 34
career meetings. The match was the last of Sampras's career. Agassi's US
Open finish, along with his Masters Series victories in Key Biscayne,
Rome and Madrid, helped him finish 2002 as the oldest year-end No. 2 at
32 years and 8 months.[65]

In 2003, Agassi won the eighth (and final) Grand Slam title of his
career at the Australian Open, where he beat Rainer Schüttler in
straight sets in the final. In March, he won his sixth career and third
consecutive Key Biscayne title, in the process surpassing his wife,
Steffi Graf, who was a five-time winner of the event. The final was his
18th straight win in that tournament, which broke the previous record of
17 set by Sampras from 1993–95. (Agassi's winning streak continued to 20
after winning his first two matches at the 2004 edition of that
tournament before bowing to Agustín Calleri.) With the victory, Agassi
became the youngest (19 years old) and oldest (32) winner of the Key
Biscayne tournament (before Djokovic and Federer overtook him in 2007
and 2017 respectively).

On April 28, 2003, he recaptured the No. 1 ranking after winning the
U.S. MEN'S CLAY COURT CHAMPIONSHIP and regained it after a quarterfinal
victory over Xavier Malisse at the Queen's Club Championships to become
the oldest top-ranked male player since the ATP rankings began at 33
years and 13 days. The record was later surpassed by Roger Federer in
2018. He had held the No. 1 ranking for two weeks, when Lleyton Hewitt
took it back on May 12, 2003. Agassi then recaptured the No. 1 ranking
once again on June 16, 2003, which he held for 12 weeks until September
7, 2003. There he managed to reach the US Open semifinals, where he lost
to Juan Carlos Ferrero, surrendering his No. 1 ranking to him. During
his career, Agassi held the ranking for a total of 101 weeks. Agassi's
ranking slipped when injuries forced him to withdraw from a number of
events. At the year-end Tennis Masters Cup, Agassi lost in the final to
Federer and finished the year ranked No. 4. At age 33, he had been one
of the oldest players to rank in the top 5 since Connors, at age 35, was
No. 4 in 1987.[66]

2004–2006: Final years

In 2004, Agassi began the year with a five-set loss in the semifinals of
the Australian Open to Marat Safin; the loss ended Agassi's 26-match
winning streak at the event. He won the Masters series event in
Cincinnati to bring his career total to 59 top-level singles titles and
a record 17 ATP Masters Series titles, having already won seven of the
nine ATP Masters tournament—all except the tournaments in Monte Carlo
and Hamburg. At 34, he became the second-oldest singles champion in
Cincinnati tournament history (the tournament began in 1899), tied with
Roger Federer and surpassed only by Ken Rosewall, who won the title in
1970 at age 35. He finished the year ranked No. 8, one of the oldest
players to finish in the top 10 since the 36-year-old Connors was No. 7
in 1988.[67] At the time, Agassi also became the sixth male player
during the open era to reach 800 career wins with his first-round
victory over Alex Bogomolov in Countrywide Classic in Los Angeles.

Agassi's 2005 began with a quarterfinal loss to Federer at the
Australian Open. Agassi had several other deep runs at tournaments, but
had to withdraw from several events due to injury. He lost to Jarkko
Nieminen in the first round of the French Open. He won his fourth title
in Los Angeles and reached the final of the Rogers Cup, before falling
to No. 2 Rafael Nadal.

Agassi's 2005 was defined by an improbable run to the US Open final.
After beating Răzvan Sabău and Ivo Karlović in straight sets and Tomáš
Berdych in four sets, Agassi won three consecutive five-set matches to
advance to the final. The most notable of these matches was his
quarterfinal victory over James Blake, where he rallied from two sets
down to win in the fifth set tie-breaker. His other five-set victories
were on Xavier Malisse in the fourth round and Robby Ginepri in the
semifinals. In the final, Agassi faced Federer, who was seeking his
second consecutive US Open title and his sixth Grand Slam title in two
years. Federer defeated Agassi in four sets. Agassi finished 2005 ranked
No. 7, his 16th time in the year-end top-10 rankings, which tied Connors
for the most times ranked in the top 10 at year's end.

Agassi had a poor start to 2006, as he was still recovering from an
ankle injury and also suffering from back and leg pain and lack of match
play. Agassi withdrew from the Australian Open because of the ankle
injury, and his back injury and other pains forced him to withdraw from
several other events, eventually skipping the entire clay-court season
including the French Open. This caused his ranking to drop out of the
top 10 for the last time. Agassi returned for the grass-court season,
playing a tune-up, and then Wimbledon. He was defeated in the third
round by world No. 2 (and eventual runner-up) Rafael Nadal. Against
conventions, Agassi, the losing player, was interviewed on court after
the match.[68] At Wimbledon, Agassi announced his plans to retire
following the US Open. Agassi played only two events during the summer
hard-court season with his best result being a quarterfinal loss at the
Countrywide Classic in Los Angeles to Fernando González of Chile, which
resulted in him being unseeded at the US Open.

Agassi had a short, but dramatic, run in his final US Open. Because of
extreme back pain, Agassi was forced to receive anti-inflammatory
injections after every match. After a tough four-set win against Andrei
Pavel, Agassi faced eighth-seeded Marcos Baghdatis in the second round
who had earlier advanced to the 2006 Australian Open final and Wimbledon
semifinals. Agassi won in five tough sets as the younger Baghdatis
succumbed to muscle cramping in the final set. In his last match, Agassi
fell to 112th-ranked big-serving Benjamin Becker of Germany in four
sets. Agassi received a four-minute standing ovation from the crowd
after the match and delivered a retirement speech.


Rivalries

Agassi vs. Sampras

The rivalry has been called the greatest of the generation of players
competing in the 90's, as Sampras and Agassi were the most successful
players of that decade. They also had very contrasting playing styles,
with Sampras being considered the greatest server and Agassi the
greatest serve returner at the time. Agassi and Sampras met 34 times on
the tour level with Agassi trailing 14–20.[69]

The 1990 US Open was their first meeting in a Grand Slam tournament
final. Agassi was favored as he was ranked No. 4 at the time, compared
to the No. 12 ranking of Sampras and because Agassi had defeated Sampras
in their only previously completed match. Agassi, however, lost the
final to Sampras in straight sets. Their next meeting in a Grand Slam
was at the 1992 French Open, where they met in the quarterfinals.
Although Sampras was ranked higher, Agassi came out winning in straight
sets. They met again on a Grand Slam level at the quarterfinals of
Wimbledon in 1993, where Agassi was the defending champion and Sampras
was the newly minted world No. 1. Agassi dug himself out from a
two-sets-to-love hole, levelling the match at 2 sets apiece; however,
Sampras prevailed in five sets, and went on to win his first Wimbledon
championship.

With both Sampras and Agassi participating, the U.S. won the Davis Cup
in 1995. The year should be considered the peak of the rivalry as
together they won 3 out of 4 major titles, meeting each other twice in
the finals, and were occupying the top two spots in the rankings for the
whole year. They met 5 times during the year, all in the title matches,
including the Australian Open, the Newsweek Champions Cup (now Indian
Wells), the Lipton International Players Championships (now Miami Open),
the Canadian Open, and the US Open. Agassi won three of the finals,
including the Australian Open; however, Sampras took the US Open title,
ending Agassi's 26-match winning streak. After Agassi had taken most of
the fall season off, Sampras took over the No. 1 ranking for the end of
the season.

In the following 3 years, while Sampras continued winning Grand Slam
titles every season, Agassi slumped in the rankings and struggled in
major competitions. The next time Sampras and Agassi met in a Grand Slam
final was at Wimbledon in 1999, where Sampras won in straight sets. For
both, it was considered a career rejuvenation, as Sampras had suffered a
string of disappointments in the previous year while Agassi was
regaining his status as a top-ranked player after winning the French
Open. Sampras forfeited the No. 1 ranking to Agassi when injury forced
him to withdraw from that year's US Open, which Agassi went on to win.
They faced each other twice in the season-ending ATP Tour World
Championships, with Sampras losing the round-robin match, but winning
the final.

In the 2000's, they met three more times on the Grand Slam level
offering three memorable contests. In 2000, the top-ranked Agassi
defeated No. 3 Sampras in the semifinals of the Australian Open in five
sets, which was an important win for Agassi who had lost 4 of the
previous 5 matches against Sampras. In arguably their most memorable
match ever, Sampras defeated Agassi in the 2001 US Open quarterfinals in
four sets. There were no breaks of serve during the entire match. Reruns
of the match are frequently featured on television, especially during US
Open rain delays, and the match is considered one of the best in history
because of the level of play presented by both players.

Their last meeting was the final of the 2002 US Open, which was their
third meeting in a US Open final, but the first since 1995. The match
was also notable because they had defeated several up-and-coming players
en route to the final. Sampras had defeated No. 3 Tommy Haas in the
fourth round and future No. 1 Andy Roddick in the quarterfinals, while
Agassi had defeated No. 1 and defending champion Lleyton Hewitt in the
semifinals. Sampras defeated Agassi in four sets. This was the final ATP
tour singles match of Sampras's career.[70]

Agassi vs. Chang

Michael Chang was the opponent Agassi faced the most frequently from all
the players other than Sampras. They met 22 times on the tour level with
Agassi leading 15-7. Chang, unlike most of Agassi's big rivals, had a
playing style similar to his. Both players preferred to stay at the
baseline with Chang being more defensive-minded. The outcome was that
most of their meetings were built on long and entertaining rallies. The
rivalry began late in the 1980s with both players being considered the
prodigies of the next great generation of American tennis players,
despite both having a foreign descent.

Agassi won the first four matches including a straight-set victory in
round 16 of the 1988 US Open and defeating Chang, the defending
champion, in the 1990 French Open in a four-set quarterfinal. Arguably
their best match took place in round 16 of the 1994 US Open. While both
players presented high-quality shot-making, the momentum changed from
set to set with Agassi eventually prevailing in a five-set victory. It
turned out to be the toughest contest on his way to his first US Open
title. Their next two Grand Slam meetings came in 1996, with Chang
recording easy straight-set victories in the semifinals of both the
Australian Open and the US Open. Years after, Agassi shockingly admitted
in his book that he had lost the first of the matches on purpose as he
did not want to face Boris Becker, who was awaiting the winner in the
final. Agassi won the last four of their matches, with the last being in
2003 at the Miami Open with Chang being clearly past his prime.

Agassi vs. Becker

Boris Becker and Agassi played 14 times with Agassi leading 10–4. Becker
won their first three matches in 1988 and 1989 before Agassi reversed
the rivalry in 1990, and won 10 of their last 11 matches. They first
played at Indian Wells in 1988, with Becker prevailing. Their most
notable match was the 1989 Davis Cup semifinal match, which Becker won
in five sets after losing the first two in tiebreaks. Agassi, considered
a baseliner with a playing style not suiting grass, shocked Becker, a
three-time champion, in a five-set quarterfinal at Wimbledon in 1992 on
his way to his first Grand Slam title. The intensity of the rivalry
peaked in 1995. Becker won that year's Wimbledon semifinal after being
down a set and two breaks, to eventually win in four sets. In a highly
anticipated rematch in the US Open semifinal, this time it was Agassi
who came out victorious in four tight sets. Their final match was played
at Hong Kong in 1999, which Agassi won in three sets.

Agassi vs. Rafter

Agassi and Pat Rafter played fifteen times with Agassi leading 10–5. The
rivalry has been considered special and delivered memorable encounters,
because of the players' contrasting styles of play, with Rafter using
traditional serve-&-volley methods against Agassi's variety of return of
serves and passing shots as his main weapons. Agassi led 8–2 on hard
courts, but Rafter surprisingly won their sole match on clay at the 1999
Rome Masters. They played four matches at Wimbledon with both winning
two matches each. Agassi won the first two in 1993 and 1999, while
Rafter took their 2000 and 2001 encounters, both of the gruelling
5-setters often being presented on the lists of best matches ever
played. Agassi also won both their meetings at the Australian Open, in
1995 and 2001, on his way to the title on both occasions. Rafter,
however, took their only US Open encounter in 1997 and went on to win
the title.

Agassi vs. Federer

Agassi and Roger Federer played 11 times, and Federer led their
head-to-head series 8–3. With the retirement of Sampras, the rivalry
against the 11-years-younger Federer, who was another great server like
Sampras, became Agassi's main rivalry for the final years of his career.
Agassi won their first three matches, but then went on to lose eight
consecutive ones. They first met in just the third tournament of
Federer's career at the 1998 Swiss Indoors in Federer's hometown, with
Agassi prevailing over the 17-year-old. Agassi also defeated Federer at
the 2001 US Open and the finals of the Miami Open in 2002. Federer began
to turn the tide at the Masters Cup in 2003, when he defeated Agassi in
both the round robin and the final. They played a memorable quarterfinal
match at the 2004 US Open that spanned over two windy days, with Federer
eventually prevailing in five sets. At the 2005 Dubai Championships,
Federer and Agassi attracted worldwide headlines with a publicity stunt
that saw the two tennis legends play on a helipad almost 220 meters
above sea level at the hotel Burj al-Arab. Their final duel took place
in the final of the 2005 US Open. In the historic clash of generations,
Federer was victorious in four sets in front of a pro-Agassi crowd. The
match was the last appearance by Agassi in any tournament final.


Earnings

Agassi earned more than $30 million in prize-money during his career,
sixth only to Djokovic, Federer, Nadal, Sampras and Murray to date (May
2018). He also earned more than $25 million a year through endorsements
during his career, which was ranked fourth in all sports at the
time.[71]


Post-retirement

Since retiring after the 2006 US Open, Agassi has participated in a
series of charity tournaments and continues his work with his own
charity. On September 5, 2007, he was a surprise guest commentator for
the Andy Roddick/Roger Federer US Open quarterfinal. He played an
exhibition match at Wimbledon, teaming with his wife, Steffi Graf, to
play with Tim Henman and Kim Clijsters. He played World Team Tennis for
the Philadelphia Freedoms in the summer of 2009.[72] At the 2009 French
Open, Agassi was on hand to present Roger Federer, who completed his
Career Grand Slam by winning the tournament and joined Agassi as one of
six men to complete the Career Grand Slam, with the trophy.[73]

Also in 2009, Agassi played at the Outback Champions Series event for
the first time. He played the Cancer Treatment Centers of America Tennis
Championships at Surprise, Arizona, where he reached the final before
bowing to eventual champion Todd Martin.[74] He also announced that he
will not be playing the tour on a full-time basis, and played the
tournament as a favor to long-time friend Jim Courier.[75] Agassi
returned to the tour renamed for the PowerShares Series in 2011 and
participated in a total of seven events while winning two. Agassi beat
Courier in the final of the Staples Champions Cup in Boston[76] and
later defeated Sampras at the CTCA Championships at his hometown Las
Vegas.[77]

In 2012, Agassi took part in five tournaments, winning three of those.
In November, at first he won BILT Champions Showdown in San Jose,
beating John McEnroe in the final.[78] The following day, he defended
his title of the CTCA Championships, while defeating Courier in the
decisive match.[79] In the series season finale, he beat Michael Chang
for the Acura Champions Cup.[80] The series and Agassi came back to
action in 2014. Agassi won both tournaments he participated in. At the
Camden Wealth Advisors Cup's final in Houston, Agassi beat James Blake
for a rematch of their 2005 US Open quarterfinal.[81] He defeated Blake
again in Portland to win the title of the Cancer Treatment Centers of
America Championships.[82] In 2015, Agassi took part in just one event
of the PowerShares Series, losing to Mark Philippoussis in the final of
the Champions Shootout.[83] The following year he took part in two
events, at first losing to Blake in Chicago, and the next day defeating
Mardy Fish, but losing to Roddick in Charleston.[84]

In 2009, in Macau Agassi and Sampras met for the first time on court
since the 2002 US Open final. Sampras won the exhibition in three
sets.[85] The rivalry between the former champions headlined sports
media again in March 2010 after the two participated in the "Hit for
Haiti" charity event organized to raise money for the victims of the
earthquake. Partnered with Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, the old
rivals began making jokes at each other's expense, which ended up with
Sampras intentionally striking a serve at Agassi's body. After the
event, Agassi admitted that he had crossed the line with his jokes and
publicly apologized to Sampras.[86] Agassi and Sampras met again one
year later for an exhibition match at Madison Square Garden in New York
in front of 19 000 spectators as Sampras defeated Agassi in two
sets.[87] On March 3, 2014, Agassi and Sampras squared off for an
exhibition in London for the annual World Tennis Day. This time, it was
Agassi who came out on top in two straight sets.[88]

He returned to the tour in May 2017 in the position of coach to Novak
Djokovic for the French Open.[89] Agassi announced the end of the
partnership on March 31, 2018, stating that there were too many
disagreements in the relationship.[90]


Playing style

Early in his career, Agassi would look to end points quickly by playing
first-strike tennis, typically by inducing a weak return with a deep,
hard shot, and then playing a winner at an extreme angle. On the rare
occasion that he charged the net, Agassi liked to take the ball in the
air and hit a swinging volley for a winner. His favored groundstroke was
his flat, accurate two-handed backhand, hit well cross-court but
especially down the line. His forehand was nearly as strong, especially
his inside-out to the ad court.[91]

Agassi's strength was in dictating play from the baseline, and he was
able to consistently take the ball on the rise.[92] While he was growing
up, his father and Nick Bollettieri trained him in this way.[93] When in
control of a point, Agassi would often pass up an opportunity to attempt
a winner and hit a conservative shot to minimize his errors, and to make
his opponent run more. This change to more methodical, less aggressive
baseline play was largely initiated by his longtime coach, Brad Gilbert,
in their first year together in 1994. Gilbert encouraged Agassi to wear
out opponents with his deep, flat groundstrokes and to use his fitness
to win attrition wars, and noted Agassi's two-handed backhand down the
line as his very best shot.[94] A signature play later in his career was
a change up drop shot to the deuce court after deep penetrating
groundstrokes. This would often be followed by a passing shot or lob if
the opponent was fast enough to retrieve it.

Agassi was raised on hardcourts, but found much of his early
major-tournament success on the red clay of Roland Garros, reaching two
consecutive finals there early in his career. Despite grass being his
worst surface, his first major win was at the slick grass of Wimbledon
in 1992, a tournament that he professed to hating at the time.[95] His
strongest surface over the course of his career, was indeed hardcourt,
where he won six of his eight majors.


Business ventures

Agassi established a limited liability company named Andre Agassi
Ventures (formerly named Agassi Enterprises).[96] Agassi, along with
five athlete partners (including Wayne Gretzky, Joe Montana, Shaquille
O'Neal, Ken Griffey, Jr., and Monica Seles) opened a chain of
sports-themed restaurant named Official All Star Café in April 1996. The
restaurant closed down in 2001.[97] In 1999, he paid $1 million for a 10
percent stake in Nevada First Bank and made a $10 million profit when it
was sold to Western Alliance Bancorp in 2006.[98] In 2002, he joined the
Tennis Channel to promote the channel to consumers and cable and
satellite industry, and made an equity investment in the network.[99]
After meeting chef Michael Mina at one of his restaurants in San
Francisco, Agassi partnered with him in 2002 to start Mina Group Inc.
and opened 18 concept restaurants in San Francisco, San Jose, Dana
Point, Atlantic City and Las Vegas.[100][101] Agassi was an equity
investor of a group that acquired Golden Nugget Las Vegas and Golden
Nugget Laughlin from MGM Mirage for $215 million in 2004.[102][103] One
year later, the group sold the hotel-casino to Landry's, Inc. for $163
million in cash and $182 million in assumed debt.[104][105] In 2007, he
sat on the board of Meadows Bank, an independent bank in Nevada.[106] He
has invested in start-up companies backed by Allen & Company.[107]

Agassi and Graf formed a company called Agassi Graf Holdings. They
invested in PURE, a nightclub at Caesars Palace, which opened in
2004,[108] and sold it to Angel Management Group in 2010.[109] In August
2006, Agassi and Graf developed a joint venture with high-end furniture
maker Kreiss Enterprises.[110] They launched a furniture line called
Agassi Graf Collection.[111][112] In September, Agassi and Graf, through
their company Agassi Graf Development LLC, along with Bayview Financial
LP, finalized an agreement to develop a condominium hotel, Fairmont
Tamarack, at Tamarack Resort in Donnelly, Idaho.[113][114] Due to
difficult market conditions and delays, they withdrew from the project
in 2009.[115][116] The group still owns three small chunks of land.[117]
In September, they collaborated with Steve Case's Exclusive Resorts to
co-develop luxury resorts and design Agassi-Graf Tennis and Fitness
Centers.[118]

They also invested in online ticket reseller viagogo in 2009 and both
serve as board members and advisors of the company.[119][120]

In October 2012, Village Roadshow and investors including Agassi and
Graf announced plans to build a new water park called Wet'n'Wild Las
Vegas in Las Vegas. Village Roadshow has a 51% stake in the park while
Agassi, Graf, and other private investors hold the remaining
49%.[121][122] The park opened in May 2013.[123]

IMG managed Agassi from the time he turned pro in 1986 through January
2000 before switching to SFX Sports Group.[124][125] His business
manager, lawyer and agent was childhood friend Perry Rogers, but they
have been estranged since 2008.[126][127] In 2009, he and Graf signed
with CAA.[128]

Equipment and endorsements

Agassi used Prince Graphite rackets early in his career.[129][130] He
signed a $7 million endorsement contract with Belgian tennis racquet
makers Donnay.[131] He later switched to Head Ti Radical racket[132] and
Head's LiquidMetal Radical racket, having signed a multimillion-dollar
endorsement deal with Head in 1993.[133][134] He renewed his contract in
1999, and in November 2003 he signed a lifetime agreement with
Head.[135][136] He also endorses Penn tennis balls. On July 25, 2005,
Agassi left Nike after 17 years and signed an endorsement deal with
Adidas.[137] A major reason for Agassi leaving Nike was because Nike
refused to donate to Agassi's charities, and Adidas was more than happy
to do so. On May 13, 2013, Agassi rejoined Nike.[138][139][140]

Agassi was sponsored by DuPont,[141][142] Ebel,[143] Mountain Dew in
1993,[144] Mazda in 1997,[145] Kia Motors in 2002,[146][147] American
Express[148] and Deutsche Bank in 2003.[149] In 1990, he appeared in a
television commercial for Canon Inc., promoting the Canon EOS Rebel
camera.[150] Between 1999 and 2000, he signed a multimillion-dollar,
multiyear endorsement deal with Schick and became the worldwide
spokesman for the company.[151] Agassi signed a multiyear contract with
Twinlab and promoted the company's nutritional supplements.[152] In
mid-2003, he was named the spokesman of Aramis Life, a fragrance by
Aramis, and signed a five-year deal with the company.[153][154] In March
2004, he signed a ten-year agreement worth $1.5 million a year with 24
Hour Fitness, which will open five Andre Agassi fitness centers by
year-end.[155] Prior to the 2012 Australian Open, Agassi and Australian
winemaker Jacobs Creek announced a three-year partnership and created
the Open Film Series to "[share] personal stories about the life
defining moments that shaped his character on and off the court."[156]
In 2007, watchmaker Longines named Agassi as their brand
ambassador.[157][158]

Agassi and his mother appeared in a Got Milk? advertisement in 2002.

Agassi has appeared in many advertisements and television commercials
with Graf. They both endorsed Deutsche Telekom in 2002,[159] Genworth
Financial[160] and Canon Inc.[161] in 2004, LVMH in 2007,[162] and
Nintendo Wii[163] and Wii Fit U[164] and Longines in 2013.[165]


Personal life

Relationships and family

In the early 1990s Agassi dated American singer and entertainer Barbra
Streisand. He wrote about the relationship in his 2009 autobiography,
"We agree that we're good for each other, and so what if she's
twenty-eight years older? We're sympatico, and the public outcry only
adds spice to our connection. It makes our friendship feel forbidden,
taboo – another piece of my overall rebellion. Dating Barbra Streisand
is like wearing Hot Lava." [166]

He was married to Brooke Shields from 1997 to 1999.

He married Steffi Graf on October 22, 2001 at their Las Vegas home; the
only witnesses were their mothers.[167] They have two children: son
Jaden Gil (born 2001) and daughter Jaz Elle (born 2003).[168] Agassi has
said that he and Graf are not pushing their children toward becoming
tennis players.[169] The Graf-Agassi family resides in Summerlin, a
community in the Las Vegas Valley.[170][171] Graf's mother and brother,
Michael, with his four children also live there.[172]

Long-time trainer Gil Reyes has been called one of Agassi's closest
friends; some have described him as being a "father figure" to
Agassi.[173][174] In 2012, Agassi and Reyes introduced their own line of
fitness equipment, BILT By Agassi and Reyes.[175] In December 2008,
Agassi's childhood friend and former business manager, Perry Rogers,
sued Graf for $50,000 in management fees he claimed that she owed
him.[176][177]

Autobiography

Agassi's autobiography, _Open: An Autobiography,_ (written with
assistance from J. R. Moehringer[178]), was published in November 2009.
In it, Agassi opens up about his childhood or having to grow up with a
very unconventional Armenian father who came to the United States from
Iran where he was a professional boxer. Overly demanding and emotionally
abusive to the whole family, his father groomed young Agassi for tennis
greatness by building a tennis court in their backyard and sending
Agassi to tennis boarding school under the supervision of Nick
Bollettieri, who later coached and managed part of Agassi's professional
career.[179]

Agassi's struggle to cope throughout his youth whilst he was forced to
be away from his family and friends at such a young age, to become a
top-rated player and celebrity, to build a team that he can trust, to
fight on the court physically and emotionally for every point, to
succeed in so many games but also experience devastating defeats across
unrelenting rivals — this is all meticulously detailed in his
autobiography.

There is also mention in the book of using and testing positive for
methamphetamine in 1997.[180][181][182] In response to this revelation,
Roger Federer declared himself shocked and disappointed, while Marat
Safin argued that Agassi should return his prize money and be stripped
of his titles.[183][184] In an interview with CBS, Agassi justified
himself and asked for understanding, saying that "It was a period in my
life where I needed help."[185]

Agassi said that he had always hated tennis during his career because of
the constant pressure it exerted on him. He also said he wore a
hairpiece earlier in his career and thought Pete Sampras was
"robotic".[186]

The book reached No. 1 on the _New York Times_ Best Seller list[187] and
received favorable reviews.[188] It won the Autobiography category of
the 2010 British Sports Book Awards.[189] In 2018 the book was listed on
_Esquire_ as one of "The 30 Best Sports Books Ever Written",[190] and
was also recommended by self-help author Tim Ferriss who described it as
"very candid, very amusing, and very instructional".[191]


In media

In 2017, Agassi appeared in the documentary film _Love Means Zero_,
which highlighted the troubled relationship between his coach Nick
Bollettieri and him.[192][193]


Politics

Agassi has donated more than $100,000 to Democratic candidates, and
$2000 to Republicans.[194][195] On September 1, 2010, when he appeared
on daily WNYC public radio program "The Brian Lehrer Show," he stated
that he is registered as Independent.[196]


Philanthropy

Agassi founded the Andre Agassi Charitable Association in 1994, which
assists Las Vegas' young people. He was awarded the ATP Arthur Ashe
Humanitarian award in 1995 for his efforts to help disadvantaged youth.
He has been cited as the most charitable and socially involved player in
professional tennis. It has also been claimed that he may be the most
charitable athlete of his generation.[197]

Agassi's charities help in assisting children reach their athletic
potential. His Boys & Girls Club sees 2,000 children throughout the year
and boasts a world-class junior tennis team. It also has a basketball
program (the Agassi Stars) and a rigorous system that encourages a mix
of academics and athletics.

In 2001, Agassi opened the Andre Agassi College Preparatory Academy[198]
in Las Vegas, a tuition-free charter school for at-risk children in the
area. He personally donated $35 million to the school.[199] In 2009, the
graduating class had a 100 percent graduation rate and expected a 100
percent college acceptance rate.[200] Among other child-related programs
that Agassi supports through his Andre Agassi Charitable Foundation is
Clark County's only residential facility for abused and neglected
children, Child Haven. In 1997, Agassi donated funding to Child Haven
for a six-room classroom building now named the Agassi Center for
Education. His foundation also provided $720,000 to assist in the
building of the Andre Agassi Cottage for Medically Fragile Children.
This 20-bed facility opened in December 2001, and accommodates
developmentally delayed or handicapped children and children quarantined
for infectious diseases.[201]

In 2007, along with several other athletes, Agassi founded the charity
Athletes for Hope, which helps professional athletes get involved in
charitable causes and aims to inspire all people to volunteer and
support their communities.[202] He created the Canyon-Agassi Charter
School Facilities Fund, now known as the Turner-Agassi Charter School
Facilities Fund. The Fund is an investment initiative for social change,
focusing on the "nationwide effort to move charters from stopgap
buildings into permanent campuses."[203]

In September 2013, the Andre Agassi Foundation for Education formed a
partnership with V20 Foods to launch Box Budd!es, a line of kids'
healthy snacks. All proceeds go to the Foundation.[204][205]

In February 2014, Agassi remodeled the vacant University of Phoenix
building as a new school called the Doral Academy West through the
Canyon-Agassi Charter School Facilities Fund. Doral Academy opened in
August 2014.[206] The Fund purchased a 4.6-acre plot in Henderson,
Nevada to house the Somerset Academy of Las Vegas, which will relocate
from its campus inside a church.[207]


Career statistics

Singles timeline overview

[TABLE]

Grand Slam finals (8 titles, 7 runner-ups)

By winning the 1999 French Open, Agassi completed a men's singles Career
Grand Slam. He is the 5th of 8 male players in history (after Budge,
Perry, Laver and Emerson, and before Federer, Nadal and Djokovic) to
achieve this.

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Result    | Year      | Tournamen | Surface   | Opponent  | Score     |
|           |           | t         |           |           |           |
+===========+===========+===========+===========+===========+===========+
| Loss      | 1990      | French    | Clay      | Andrés    | 3–6, 6–2, |
|           |           | Open      |           | Gómez     | 4–6, 4–6  |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Loss      | 1990      | US Open   | Hard      | Pete      | 4–6, 3–6, |
|           |           |           |           | Sampras   | 2–6       |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Loss      | 1991      | French    | Clay      | Jim       | 6–3, 4–6, |
|           |           | Open      |           | Courier   | 6–2, 1–6, |
|           |           |           |           |           | 4–6       |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Win       | 1992      | Wimbledon | Grass     | Goran     | 6–7^((8–1 |
|           |           |           |           | Ivaniševi | 0)),      |
|           |           |           |           | ć         | 6–4, 6–4, |
|           |           |           |           |           | 1–6, 6–4  |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Win       | 1994      | US Open   | Hard      | Michael   | 6–1,      |
|           |           |           |           | Stich     | 7–6^((7–5 |
|           |           |           |           |           | )),       |
|           |           |           |           |           | 7–5       |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Win       | 1995      | Australia | Hard      | Pete      | 4–6, 6–1, |
|           |           | n         |           | Sampras   | 7–6^((8–6 |
|           |           | Open      |           |           | )),       |
|           |           |           |           |           | 6–4       |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Loss      | 1995      | US Open   | Hard      | Pete      | 4–6, 3–6, |
|           |           |           |           | Sampras   | 6–4, 5–7  |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Win       | 1999      | French    | Clay      | Andrei    | 1–6, 2–6, |
|           |           | Open      |           | Medvedev  | 6–4, 6–3, |
|           |           |           |           |           | 6–4       |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Loss      | 1999      | Wimbledon | Grass     | Pete      | 3–6, 4–6, |
|           |           |           |           | Sampras   | 5–7       |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Win       | 1999      | US Open   | Hard      | Todd      | 6–4,      |
|           |           |           |           | Martin    | 6–7^((5–7 |
|           |           |           |           |           | )),       |
|           |           |           |           |           | 6–7^((2–7 |
|           |           |           |           |           | )),       |
|           |           |           |           |           | 6–3, 6–2  |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Win       | 2000      | Australia | Hard      | Yevgeny   | 3–6, 6–3, |
|           |           | n         |           | Kafelniko | 6–2, 6–4  |
|           |           | Open      |           | v         |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Win       | 2001      | Australia | Hard      | Arnaud    | 6–4, 6–2, |
|           |           | n         |           | Clément   | 6–2       |
|           |           | Open      |           |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Loss      | 2002      | US Open   | Hard      | Pete      | 3–6, 4–6, |
|           |           |           |           | Sampras   | 7–5, 4–6  |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Win       | 2003      | Australia | Hard      | Rainer    | 6–2, 6–2, |
|           |           | n         |           | Schüttler | 6–1       |
|           |           | Open      |           |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Loss      | 2005      | US Open   | Hard      | Roger     | 3–6, 6–2, |
|           |           |           |           | Federer   | 6–7^((1–7 |
|           |           |           |           |           | )),       |
|           |           |           |           |           | 1–6       |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

Open Era records

-   These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis and in ATP
    World Tour Masters 1000 series since 1990.
-   Records in BOLD indicate peer-less achievements.

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Time span             | Selected Grand Slam   | Players matched       |
|                       | tournament records    |                       |
+=======================+=======================+=======================+
| 1990                  | Career "Super         | STANDS ALONE          |
| YEC{{#tag:ref|Abbrevi | Slam"{{#tag:ref|A     |                       |
| ation                 | "Career Super Slam"   |                       |
| for "Year-End         | entails winning all 4 |                       |
| Championship".|group= | Majors, the Year-End  |                       |
| lower-alpha}}         | Championship and the  |                       |
| —                     | Olympic gold medal in |                       |
| 1999 French Open      | singles.|group=lower- |                       |
|                       | alpha}}[211]          |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| 1992 Wimbledon —      | Career Golden         | Rafael Nadal          |
| 1999 French Open      | Slam[212]             |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| 1992 Wimbledon —      | Career Grand          | Rod Laver             |
| 1999 French Open      | Slam[213]             | Roger Federer         |
|                       |                       | Rafael Nadal          |
|                       |                       | Novak Djokovic        |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| 1996 Olympics —       | Simultaneous holder   | Rafael Nadal          |
| 1999 US Open          | of Olympic singles    |                       |
|                       | gold medal and Majors |                       |
|                       | on clay & hard court  |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| 1996 Olympics —       | Simultaneous holder   | Rafael Nadal          |
| 2000 Australian Open  | of Olympic singles    |                       |
|                       | gold medal and 3      |                       |
|                       | Majors                |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Grand Slam      | Time Span       | Records at each | Players matched |
| tournaments     |                 | Grand Slam      |                 |
|                 |                 | tournament      |                 |
+=================+=================+=================+=================+
| Australian Open | 2000–2004       | 26 consecutive  | '''Stands alone |
|                 |                 | match wins      |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| 1995            | Won tournament  | Jimmy Connors   |                 |
|                 | on the first    | Roscoe Tanner   |                 |
|                 | attempt         | Vitas           |                 |
|                 |                 | Gerulaitis      |                 |
|                 |                 | Johan Kriek     |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| 1995–2005       | 90.57% (48–5)   | '''Stands alone |                 |
|                 | match winning   |                 |                 |
|                 | percentage      |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| 2003            | 71.6% (121–48)  | '''Stands alone |                 |
|                 | games winning   |                 |                 |
|                 | percentage in 1 |                 |                 |
|                 | tournament      |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| US Open         | 1986–2006       | 21 consecutive  | '''Stands alone |
|                 |                 | tournaments     |                 |
|                 |                 | played[215]     |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Time span | Other selected records                  | Players matched |
+===========+=========================================+=================+
| 1990–2003 | 6 Miami Masters titles[216]             | Novak Djokovic  |
+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+
| 2001–2003 | 3 consecutive Miami Masters titles      | Novak Djokovic  |
+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+
| 1990–2003 | 8 Miami Masters finals                  | '''Stands alone |
+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+
| 1988–2005 | 61 match wins at Miami Masters          | '''Stands alone |
+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+
| 2001–2004 | 19 consecutive wins at Miami Masters    | '''Stands alone |
+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+
| 1990–1999 | 5 Washington Open titles                | '''Stands alone |
+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+
| 1993–2002 | 4 Los Angeles Open titles               | Jimmy Connors   |
|           |                                         | Roy Emerson     |
|           |                                         | Frank Parker    |
+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+
| 1988–2005 | Ended 16 years ranked inside the top 10 | Jimmy Connors   |
|           |                                         | Roger Federer   |
+-----------+-----------------------------------------+-----------------+


Legacy

Considered by numerous sources to be one of the greatest tennis players
of all time,[217][218][219][220][221] Agassi has also been called one of
the greatest service returner ever to play the game, and was described
by the BBC upon his retirement as "perhaps the biggest worldwide star in
the sport's history".[222][223][224][225][226] As a result, he is
credited for helping to revive the popularity of tennis during the
1990s.[227][228][229]


Professional awards

-   ITF World Champion: 1999.
-   ATP Player of the Year: 1999.
-   ATP Most Improved Player: 1988, 1998


Recognition

-   In 1992, Agassi was named the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the
    Year.
-   In 2010, _Sports Illustrated_ named Agassi the 7th greatest male
    player of all time.[230]
-   On July 9, 2011, Agassi was inducted into the International Tennis
    Hall of Fame at a ceremony in Newport, Rhode Island.[231]


Video

-   _Wimbledon 2000 Semi-final – Agassi vs. Rafter (2003)_ Starring:
    Andre Agassi, Patrick Rafter; Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date:
    August 16, 2005, Run Time: 213 minutes, .
-   _Charlie Rose with Andre Agassi (May 7, 2001)_ Charlie Rose, Inc.,
    DVD Release Date: August 15, 2006, Run Time: 57 minutes.
-   _Wimbledon: The Record Breakers (2005)_ Starring: Andre Agassi,
    Boris Becker; Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date: August 16, 2005,
    Run Time: 52 minutes, .


Video games

-   _Andre Agassi Tennis_ for the SNES, Sega Genesis, Sega Game Gear,
    Master System, and Mobile phone[232]
-   _Agassi Tennis Generation_ for PS2 and GBA
-   _Agassi Tennis Generation 2002_ for Windows[233]
-   _Smash Court Pro Tournament_ for PS2
-   _Top Spin 4_ (On cover of game) for Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and Wii


See also

-   List of Grand Slam Men's Singles champions
-   Agassi–Sampras rivalry
-   Tennis male players statistics
-   All-time tennis records – men's singles
-   Tennis records of the Open Era – men's singles


Notes


References


Further reading

-   -


External links

-   -   -   -   -   -   Andre Agassi Ventures
-   Farewell to Tennis Speech at the U.S. Open
-   Agassi's Tennis Hall of Fame Induction for Steffi Graf
-

Category:1970 births Category:American male tennis players
Category:American people of Armenian descent Category:American people of
Iranian-Assyrian descent Category:American philanthropists
Category:Australian Open (tennis) champions Category:Doping cases in
tennis Category:French Open champions Category:Grand Slam (tennis)
champions in men's singles Category:International Tennis Hall of Fame
inductees Category:Living people Category:Nevada Democrats
Category:Assyrian sportspeople Category:Olympic gold medalists for the
United States in tennis Category:Olympic tennis players of the United
States Category:Sportspeople from the Las Vegas Valley Category:Tennis
people from Nevada Category:Tennis players at the 1996 Summer Olympics
Category:US Open (tennis) champions Category:Wimbledon champions
Category:World No. 1 tennis players Category:Iranian Assyrian people
Category:Iranian Armenian people Category:Sportspeople of Iranian
descent Category:American autobiographers Category:Writers from Nevada
Category:Medalists at the 1996 Summer Olympics Category:American
sportspeople in doping cases Category:20th-century American
businesspeople Category:21st-century American businesspeople
Category:American investors Category:American real estate businesspeople
Category:Novak Djokovic Category:Steffi Graf Category:Armenian-American
tennis players Category:Assyrian-American tennis players

[1]

[2]  Good Morning America {{!}} ABC News|author=ABC
News|website=YouTube|date=2012-11-13|accessdate=2018-01-09}}

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11] Jhabvala, Nick. "Tale of the Tape". _Sports Illustrated_. November
2, 2009. Retrieved July 21, 2012.

[12] Mehrotra, Abhishek. "Agassi: Last of the great Americans" _ESPN
Star_. Retrieved July 21, 2012.

[13] "Nickometer: Popular nicknames in the world of sport". MSN Sport.
May 3, 2012. Retrieved July 21, 2012.

[14] Calvert, Sean. "Australian Open Betting: The best finals ever".
Betfair. January 10, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2012.

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52] Andre Agassi interview. _The Ellen DeGeneres Show_. November 19,
2009.

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72] Andre Agassi Will Play WTT SI.com, March 1, 2009

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93] Open: Andre Agassi HarpersCollins 2009

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]

[138]

[139]

[140]

[141]

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

[147]

[148]

[149]

[150]

[151]

[152]

[153]

[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

[165]

[166]

[167]

[168]

[169] "Tennis: Agassi taking different tact with fatherhood," The New
Zealand Herald, January 25, 2013

[170]

[171]

[172]

[173]

[174]

[175]

[176] _Alliance Sports Management v. Stephanie Graf_ _Las Vegas Sun_.
Retrieved October 23, 2009.

[177] "Ex-manager for Agassi sues Graf" _Las Vegas Review-Journal_
December 7, 2008. Retrieved October 23, 2009.

[178] "Agassi Basks in His Own Spotlight" by Janet Malin _New York
Times_ November 8, 2009. Retrieved December 11, 2009.

[179]

[180]

[181]

[182]

[183]

[184]

[185]

[186]

[187]

[188]

[189]

[190]

[191]

[192]

[193]

[194]

[195]

[196]

[197]

[198]

[199]

[200]

[201]

[202]

[203]

[204]

[205]

[206]

[207]

[208]

[209]

[210]

[211]

[212]

[213]

[214]

[215]

[216]

[217]

[218]

[219]

[220]

[221] "Stars pay tribute to Agassi". BBC. Retrieved May 15, 2010.

[222]

[223]

[224] "Reed's shotmakers: Men's return of serve". Yahoo! Sports.
Retrieved May 15, 2010.

[225] "Adjectives Tangled in the Net". _The New York Times_. Retrieved
May 15, 2010.

[226] "Sampras, Agassi Have Just Begun to Fight" _Los Angeles Times_.
Retrieved 15, 2010.

[227]

[228]

[229]

[230]

[231]

[232]

[233]