ANGEL ANGELOV DIMITROV () is a Bulgarian politician of the Bulgarian Agrarian National Union (BAP). Secretary of the Standing Committee of the Agrarian Union, the Secretary of Agrarian from December 1989 to March 1990 he was the last in the history of Bulgarian statehood First Deputy Chairman of the State Council in 1989 - 1990 until the closure of the institution on 3 April 1990 by IX-th National Assembly of the PRB.


Biography

Born on January 1, 1927 in the village of Mogilino, Dve Mogili Rousse. He graduated from high school in the city. Rousse. ZMS became a member of the 1944 In 1950 he was elected secretary of the district leadership of the BAP-Rousse, 1951 is a regional correspondent. "Agricultural Flag" from 1952 to 1959 GG Secretary of the District Executive of the BAP in Rousse. In 1959-1962 GG Chairman of the District Executive of the BAP in Silistra and Deputy Chairman of the District Council in Silistra.

In 1962 he was elected a member of parliament and head of "political education" of the GOP of the BAP. During the period 1964 -1972 was deputy chairman of the Sofia City People's Council. Since 1973 a member of the GOP and the head of "International Relations" of the GOP of the Agrarian Union of May 21, 1986 to December 2, 1989.Since 1974 Secretary of permanent presence of BAP. He became a member of the State Council of the PRB in 1981. On December 2, 1989 he was elected Secretary of the BAP. On December 14, 1989 was appointed First Deputy Chairman of the State Council of the People's Republic of Bulgaria. On December 28, 1989 Agrarian solemnly celebrated the 90th anniversary of its foundation.

In 1990 the Agrarian Union took part in the round table, but was forced to withdraw from participation in the new government of Andrey Lukanov in February 1990 in which 50-year coalition BCP and BAP goes into history. Since the beginning of the democratic changes BSP and UDF are trying their best to assimilate BZNS not agree to a third party of the Round Table.On the 36th extraordinary congress of the Agrarian Union in March 1990 the leadership of the BAP filed resignation. On March 30, 1990 National Round Table submit a bill to amend the old constitution under which the function of head of state performs chairman of the State Council. On April 3, 1990 IX National Assembly passed an amendment to the Constitution of 1971, which Institution Council of State was replaced by the institution Chairman (President). President of the State Council Petar Mladenov became chairman (president) of the Republic.

Angel Dimitrov was a member of the National Council of the Fatherland Front and a member of the World Peace Council. Promotion of the policy pursued by Bulgaria disarmament in the period 1980 - 1989, and the Bulgarian launched the idea of turning the Balkans into a nuclear-free zone is implemented by the Agrarian Party as a huge international prestige. Foreign Department of Political Agrarian meetings in Berlin, Helsinki and Brussels in his meetings with Western politicians done a tremendous job in promoting nuclear-free idea for detente in the political climate. Made steps to reduce international tensions led to a number of concrete steps such as the Treaty on the Elimination of short- and medium-range missiles in Europe signed on December 7, 1987 between the USSR and the USA in Washington and others. Foreign Department of Political Agrarian supports direct connections to more than 50 rural and like-minded parties and movements in the world, participated in numerous international conferences agrarian parties, initiator of many international meetings on peace.

In the last years of his life Angel Dimitrov work for unification of the Agrarian Union. Angel Dimitrov died on October 8, 2005 On December 19, 2007 was posthumously awarded the title "Honorary citizen of the municipality Two mounds."


References

Category:1927 births Category:2005 deaths Category:Bulgarian Agrarian National Union politicians Category:Members of the National Assembly (Bulgaria) Category:20th-century Bulgarian politicians