_ANIMALIA_ is an illustrated children's book by Graeme Base. It was
originally published in 1986, followed by a tenth anniversary edition in
1996, and a 25th anniversary edition in 2012. Over four million copies
have been sold worldwide.[1] A special numbered and signed anniversary
edition was also published in 1996, with an embossed gold jacket.[2]


Synopsis

_Animalia_ is an alliterative alphabet book and contains twenty-six
illustrations, one for each letter of the alphabet. Each illustration
features an animal from the animal kingdom (A is for alligator, B is for
butterfly, etc.) along with a short poem utilizing the letter of the
page for many of the words. The illustrations contain many other objects
beginning with that letter that the reader can try to identify. As an
additional challenge, the author has hidden a picture of himself as a
child in every picture.


Related products

Julia MacRae Books published an _Animalia_ colouring book in 2008.[3] H.
N. Abrams also published a wall calendar colouring book version for
children the same year.[4]

H. N. Abrams published _The Animalia Wall Frieze_, a fold-out over 26
feet in length, in which the author created new riddles for each
letter.[5]

The Great American Puzzle Factory created a 300-piece jigsaw puzzle
based on the book's cover.[6]


Adaptations

A television series was also created, based on the book, which airs in
the United States, Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, Norway and
Venezuela. It also airs on Minimax for the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
And recently in Greece on the channel ET1. The Australian Children's
Television Foundation released a teaching resource DVD-ROM in 2011 to
accompany the TV series with teaching aids for classroom use.[7]

In 2010, The Base Factory and AppBooks released Animalia as an
application for iPad and iPhone/iPod Touch.[8]


Awards

_Animalia_ won the Young Australian's Best Book Award in 1987 for Best
Picture Story Book.[9]

The Children's Book Council of Australia designated _Animalia_ a 1987
Picture Book of the Year: Honour Book.[10]

Kid's Own Australian Literature Awards named _Animalia_ the 1988 Picture
Book Winner.[11]


References


External links

-   Graeme Base's official website
-   A Learning Time activity guide for _Animalia_ created by The Little
    Big Book Club

Category:Alphabet books Category:1986 children's books Category:Picture
books by Graeme Base Category:Puzzle books Category:Australian
children's books

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]