ANTHROPOLOGY is the scientific study of humans and human behavior and
societies in the past and present.[1][2][3] Social anthropology studies
patterns of behaviour and cultural anthropology[4][5][6] studies
cultural meaning, including norms and values. Linguistic anthropology
studies how language influences social life. Biological or physical
anthropology[7][8][9] studies the biological development of humans.

Archaeology, which studies human activity through investigation of
physical evidence, is thought of as a branch of anthropology in the
United States and Canada, while in Europe, it is viewed as a discipline
in its own right or grouped under other related disciplines, such as
history.


Origin and development of the term

Sahagun.jpg is considered to be the founder of modern
anthropology.[10]]] The abstract noun _anthropology_ is first attested
in reference to history.[11] Its present use first appeared in
Renaissance Germany in the works of Magnus Hundt and Otto Casmann.[12]
Their New Latin __ derived from the combining forms of the Greek words
_ánthrōpos_ (, "human") and _lógos_ (, "study").[13] (Its adjectival
form appeared in the works of Aristotle.)[14] It began to be used in
English, possibly via French __, by the early 18th century.[15]

Through the 19th century

In 1647, the Bartholins, founders of the University of Copenhagen,
defined __ as follows:[16] Sporadic use of the term for some of the
subject matter occurred subsequently, such as the use by Étienne Serres
in 1839 to describe the natural history, or paleontology, of man, based
on comparative anatomy, and the creation of a chair in anthropology and
ethnography in 1850 at the National Museum of Natural History (France)
by Jean Louis Armand de Quatrefages de Bréau. Various short-lived
organizations of anthropologists had already been formed. The Société
Ethnologique de Paris, the first to use Ethnology, was formed in 1839.
Its members were primarily anti-slavery activists. When slavery was
abolished in France in 1848 the Société was abandoned.

Meanwhile, the Ethnological Society of New York, currently the American
Ethnological Society, was founded on its model in 1842, as well as the
Ethnological Society of London in 1843, a break-away group of the
Aborigines' Protection Society.[17] These anthropologists of the times
were liberal, anti-slavery, and pro-human-rights activists. They
maintained international connections.

Anthropology and many other current fields are the intellectual results
of the comparative methods developed in the earlier 19th century.
Theorists in such diverse fields as anatomy, linguistics, and Ethnology,
making feature-by-feature comparisons of their subject matters, were
beginning to suspect that similarities between animals, languages, and
folkways were the result of processes or laws unknown to them then.[18]
For them, the publication of Charles Darwin's _On the Origin of Species_
was the epiphany of everything they had begun to suspect. Darwin himself
arrived at his conclusions through comparison of species he had seen in
agronomy and in the wild.

Darwin and Wallace unveiled evolution in the late 1850s. There was an
immediate rush to bring it into the social sciences. Paul Broca in Paris
was in the process of breaking away from the Société de biologie to form
the first of the explicitly anthropological societies, the Société
d'Anthropologie de Paris, meeting for the first time in Paris in
1859.[19] When he read Darwin, he became an immediate convert to
_Transformisme_, as the French called evolutionism.[20] His definition
now became "the study of the human group, considered as a whole, in its
details, and in relation to the rest of nature".[21]

Broca, being what today would be called a neurosurgeon, had taken an
interest in the pathology of speech. He wanted to localize the
difference between man and the other animals, which appeared to reside
in speech. He discovered the speech center of the human brain, today
called Broca's area after him. His interest was mainly in Biological
anthropology, but a German philosopher specializing in psychology,
Theodor Waitz, took up the theme of general and social anthropology in
his six-volume work, entitled _Die Anthropologie der Naturvölker_,
1859–1864. The title was soon translated as "The Anthropology of
Primitive Peoples". The last two volumes were published posthumously.

Waitz defined anthropology as "the science of the nature of man".
Following Broca's lead, Waitz points out that anthropology is a new
field, which would gather material from other fields, but would differ
from them in the use of comparative anatomy, physiology, and psychology
to differentiate man from "the animals nearest to him". He stresses that
the data of comparison must be empirical, gathered by
experimentation.[22] The history of civilization, as well as ethnology,
are to be brought into the comparison. It is to be presumed
fundamentally that the species, man, is a unity, and that "the same laws
of thought are applicable to all men".[23]

Waitz was influential among the British ethnologists. In 1863 the
explorer Richard Francis Burton and the speech therapist James Hunt
broke away from the Ethnological Society of London to form the
Anthropological Society of London, which henceforward would follow the
path of the new anthropology rather than just ethnology. It was the 2nd
society dedicated to general anthropology in existence. Representatives
from the French _Société_ were present, though not Broca. In his keynote
address, printed in the first volume of its new publication, _The
Anthropological Review_, Hunt stressed the work of Waitz, adopting his
definitions as a standard.[24] Among the first associates were the young
Edward Burnett Tylor, inventor of cultural anthropology, and his brother
Alfred Tylor, a geologist. Previously Edward had referred to himself as
an ethnologist; subsequently, an anthropologist.

Similar organizations in other countries followed: The Anthropological
Society of Madrid (1865), the American Anthropological Association in
1902, the Anthropological Society of Vienna (1870), the Italian Society
of Anthropology and Ethnology (1871), and many others subsequently. The
majority of these were evolutionist. One notable exception was the
Berlin Society for Anthropology, Ethnology, and Prehistory (1869)
founded by Rudolph Virchow, known for his vituperative attacks on the
evolutionists. Not religious himself, he insisted that Darwin's
conclusions lacked empirical foundation.

During the last three decades of the 19th century, a proliferation of
anthropological societies and associations occurred, most independent,
most publishing their own journals, and all international in membership
and association. The major theorists belonged to these organizations.
They supported the gradual osmosis of anthropology curricula into the
major institutions of higher learning. By 1898 the American Association
for the Advancement of Science was able to report that 48 educational
institutions in 13 countries had some curriculum in anthropology. None
of the 75 faculty members were under a department named
anthropology.[25]

20th and 21st centuries

This meager statistic expanded in the 20th century to comprise
anthropology departments in the majority of the world's higher
educational institutions, many thousands in number. Anthropology has
diversified from a few major subdivisions to dozens more. Practical
anthropology, the use of anthropological knowledge and technique to
solve specific problems, has arrived; for example, the presence of
buried victims might stimulate the use of a forensic archaeologist to
recreate the final scene. The organization has reached global level. For
example, the World Council of Anthropological Associations (WCAA), "a
network of national, regional and international associations that aims
to promote worldwide communication and cooperation in anthropology",
currently contains members from about three dozen nations.[26]

Since the work of Franz Boas and Bronisław Malinowski in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries, _social_ anthropology in Great Britain and
_cultural_ anthropology in the US have been distinguished from other
social sciences by its emphasis on cross-cultural comparisons, long-term
in-depth examination of context, and the importance it places on
participant-observation or experiential immersion in the area of
research. Cultural anthropology, in particular, has emphasized cultural
relativism, holism, and the use of findings to frame cultural
critiques.[27] This has been particularly prominent in the United
States, from Boas' arguments against 19th-century racial ideology,
through Margaret Mead's advocacy for gender equality and sexual
liberation, to current criticisms of post-colonial oppression and
promotion of multiculturalism. Ethnography is one of its primary
research designs as well as the text that is generated from
anthropological fieldwork.[28][29][30]

In Great Britain and the Commonwealth countries, the British tradition
of social anthropology tends to dominate. In the United States,
anthropology has traditionally been divided into the four field approach
developed by Franz Boas in the early 20th century: _biological_ or
_physical_ anthropology; _social_, _cultural_, or _sociocultural_
anthropology; and archaeology; plus anthropological linguistics. These
fields frequently overlap but tend to use different methodologies and
techniques.

European countries with overseas colonies tended to practice more
ethnology (a term coined and defined by Adam F. Kollár in 1783). It is
sometimes referred to as sociocultural anthropology in the parts of the
world that were influenced by the European tradition.[31]


Fields

Anthropology is a global discipline involving humanities, social
sciences and natural sciences. Anthropology builds upon knowledge from
natural sciences, including the discoveries about the origin and
evolution of _Homo sapiens_, human physical traits, human behavior, the
variations among different groups of humans, how the evolutionary past
of _Homo sapiens_ has influenced its social organization and culture,
and from social sciences, including the organization of human social and
cultural relations, institutions, social conflicts, etc.[32][33] Early
anthropology originated in Classical Greece and Persia and studied and
tried to understand observable cultural diversity.[34][35] As such,
anthropology has been central in the development of several new (late
20th century) interdisciplinary fields such as cognitive science,[36]
global studies, and various ethnic studies.

According to Clifford Geertz,

Sociocultural anthropology has been heavily influenced by structuralist
and postmodern theories, as well as a shift toward the analysis of
modern societies. During the 1970s and 1990s, there was an
epistemological shift away from the positivist traditions that had
largely informed the discipline.[37] During this shift, enduring
questions about the nature and production of knowledge came to occupy a
central place in cultural and social anthropology. In contrast,
archaeology and biological anthropology remained largely positivist. Due
to this difference in epistemology, the four sub-fields of anthropology
have lacked cohesion over the last several decades.

Sociocultural

Sociocultural anthropology draws together the principle axes of cultural
anthropology and social anthropology. Cultural anthropology is the
comparative study of the manifold ways in which people _make sense_ of
the world around them, while social anthropology is the study of the
_relationships_ among individuals and groups.[38] Cultural anthropology
is more related to philosophy, literature and the arts (how one's
culture affects the experience for self and group, contributing to a
more complete understanding of the people's knowledge, customs, and
institutions), while social anthropology is more related to sociology
and history.[39] In that, it helps develop an understanding of social
structures, typically of others and other populations (such as
minorities, subgroups, dissidents, etc.). There is no hard-and-fast
distinction between them, and these categories overlap to a considerable
degree.

Inquiry in sociocultural anthropology is guided in part by cultural
relativism, the attempt to understand other societies in terms of their
own cultural symbols and values.[40] Accepting other cultures in their
own terms moderates reductionism in cross-cultural comparison.[41] This
project is often accommodated in the field of ethnography. Ethnography
can refer to both a methodology and the product of ethnographic
research, i.e. an ethnographic monograph. As a methodology, ethnography
is based upon long-term fieldwork within a community or other research
site. Participant observation is one of the foundational methods of
social and cultural anthropology.[42] Ethnology involves the systematic
comparison of different cultures. The process of participant-observation
can be especially helpful to understanding a culture from an emic
(conceptual, vs. etic, or technical) point of view.

The study of kinship and social organization is a central focus of
sociocultural anthropology, as kinship is a human universal.
Sociocultural anthropology also covers economic and political
organization, law and conflict resolution, patterns of consumption and
exchange, material culture, technology, infrastructure, gender
relations, ethnicity, childrearing and socialization, religion, myth,
symbols, values, etiquette, worldview, sports, music, nutrition,
recreation, games, food, festivals, and language (which is also the
object of study in linguistic anthropology).

Comparison across cultures is a key element of method in sociocultural
anthropology, including the industrialized (and de-industrialized) West.
Cultures in the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS)[43] of world
societies are:

+-------------------------------------------------------------+--+
| Africa African_sccs_cultures.jpg                            |  |
+=============================================================+==+
| Circum-Mediterranean Circum-mediterannean_sccs_cultures.jpg |  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+--+
| East Eurasia East_eurasian_sccs_cultures.jpg                |  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+--+
| Insular Pacific Insular_pacific.jpg                         |  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+--+
| North America North_american_sccs_cultures.jpg              |  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+--+
| South America South_america_SCCS_cultures.jpg               |  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+--+

Biological

Human_remains.jpg

Biological anthropology and physical anthropology are synonymous terms
to describe anthropological research focused on the study of humans and
non-human primates in their biological, evolutionary, and demographic
dimensions. It examines the biological and social factors that have
affected the evolution of humans and other primates, and that generate,
maintain or change contemporary genetic and physiological variation.[44]

Archaeological

Archaeology is the study of the human past through its material remains.
Artifacts, faunal remains, and human altered landscapes are evidence of
the cultural and material lives of past societies. Archaeologists
examine this material remains in order to deduce patterns of past human
behavior and cultural practices. Ethnoarchaeology is a type of
archaeology that studies the practices and material remain of living
human groups in order to gain a better understanding of the evidence
left behind by past human groups, who are presumed to have lived in
similar ways.[45] Rosetta_Stone.svg

Linguistic

Linguistic anthropology (not to be confused with anthropological
linguistics) seeks to understand the processes of human communications,
verbal and non-verbal, variation in language across time and space, the
social uses of language, and the relationship between language and
culture.[46] It is the branch of anthropology that brings linguistic
methods to bear on anthropological problems, linking the analysis of
linguistic forms and processes to the interpretation of sociocultural
processes. Linguistic anthropologists often draw on related fields
including sociolinguistics, pragmatics, cognitive linguistics,
semiotics, discourse analysis, and narrative analysis.[47]


Key topics by field: sociocultural

Art, media, music, dance and film

Art

One of the central problems in the anthropology of art concerns the
universality of 'art' as a cultural phenomenon. Several anthropologists
have noted that the Western categories of 'painting', 'sculpture', or
'literature', conceived as independent artistic activities, do not
exist, or exist in a significantly different form, in most non-Western
contexts.[48] To surmount this difficulty, anthropologists of art have
focused on formal features in objects which, without exclusively being
'artistic', have certain evident 'aesthetic' qualities. Boas' _Primitive
Art_, Claude Lévi-Strauss' _The Way of the Masks_ (1982) or Geertz's
'Art as Cultural System' (1983) are some examples in this trend to
transform the anthropology of 'art' into an anthropology of culturally
specific 'aesthetics'.

Media

Punu_mask_Gabon.JPG Media anthropology (also known as the anthropology
of media or mass media) emphasizes ethnographic studies as a means of
understanding producers, audiences, and other cultural and social
aspects of mass media. The types of ethnographic contexts explored range
from contexts of media production (e.g., ethnographies of newsrooms in
newspapers, journalists in the field, film production) to contexts of
media reception, following audiences in their everyday responses to
media. Other types include cyber anthropology, a relatively new area of
internet research, as well as ethnographies of other areas of research
which happen to involve media, such as development work, social
movements, or health education. This is in addition to many classic
ethnographic contexts, where media such as radio, the press, new media,
and television have started to make their presences felt since the early
1990s.[49][50]

Music

Ethnomusicology is an academic field encompassing various approaches to
the study of music (broadly defined), that emphasize its cultural,
social, material, cognitive, biological, and other dimensions or
contexts instead of or in addition to its isolated sound component or
any particular repertoire.

Visual

Visual anthropology is concerned, in part, with the study and production
of ethnographic photography, film and, since the mid-1990s, new media.
While the term is sometimes used interchangeably with ethnographic film,
visual anthropology also encompasses the anthropological study of visual
representation, including areas such as performance, museums, art, and
the production and reception of mass media. Visual representations from
all cultures, such as sandpaintings, tattoos, sculptures and reliefs,
cave paintings, scrimshaw, jewelry, hieroglyphics, paintings, and
photographs are included in the focus of visual anthropology.

Economic, political economic, applied and development

Economic

Economic anthropology attempts to explain human economic behavior in its
widest historic, geographic and cultural scope. It has a complex
relationship with the discipline of economics, of which it is highly
critical. Its origins as a sub-field of anthropology begin with the
Polish-British founder of anthropology, Bronisław Malinowski, and his
French compatriot, Marcel Mauss, on the nature of gift-giving exchange
(or reciprocity) as an alternative to market exchange. Economic
Anthropology remains, for the most part, focused upon exchange. The
school of thought derived from Marx and known as Political Economy
focuses on production, in contrast.[51] Economic anthropologists have
abandoned the primitivist niche they were relegated to by economists,
and have now turned to examine corporations, banks, and the global
financial system from an anthropological perspective.

Political economy

Political economy in anthropology is the application of the theories and
methods of Historical Materialism to the traditional concerns of
anthropology, including, but not limited to, non-capitalist societies.
Political economy introduced questions of history and colonialism to
ahistorical anthropological theories of social structure and culture.
Three main areas of interest rapidly developed. The first of these areas
was concerned with the "pre-capitalist" societies that were subject to
evolutionary "tribal" stereotypes. Sahlin's work on hunter-gatherers as
the "original affluent society" did much to dissipate that image. The
second area was concerned with the vast majority of the world's
population at the time, the peasantry, many of whom were involved in
complex revolutionary wars such as in Vietnam. The third area was on
colonialism, imperialism, and the creation of the capitalist
world-system.[52] More recently, these political economists have more
directly addressed issues of industrial (and post-industrial) capitalism
around the world.

Applied

Applied anthropology refers to the application of the method and theory
of anthropology to the analysis and solution of practical problems. It
is a "complex of related, research-based, instrumental methods which
produce change or stability in specific cultural systems through the
provision of data, initiation of direct action, and/or the formulation
of policy".[53] More simply, applied anthropology is the practical side
of anthropological research; it includes researcher involvement and
activism within the participating community. It is closely related to
development anthropology (distinct from the more critical anthropology
of development).

Development

Anthropology of development tends to view development from a _critical_
perspective. The kind of issues addressed and implications for the
approach simply involve pondering why, if a key development goal is to
alleviate poverty, is poverty increasing? Why is there such a gap
between plans and outcomes? Why are those working in development so
willing to disregard history and the lessons it might offer? Why is
development so externally driven rather than having an internal basis?
In short, why does so much planned development fail?

Kinship, feminism, gender and sexuality

Kinship

_Kinship_ can refer both to _the study of_ the patterns of social
relationships in one or more human cultures, or it can refer to _the
patterns of social relationships_ themselves. Over its history,
anthropology has developed a number of related concepts and terms, such
as "descent", "descent groups", "lineages", "affines", "cognates", and
even "fictive kinship". Broadly, kinship patterns may be considered to
include people related both by descent (one's social relations during
development), and also relatives by marriage.

Feminist

Feminist anthropology is a four field approach to anthropology
(archeological, biological, cultural, linguistic) that seeks to reduce
male bias in research findings, anthropological hiring practices, and
the scholarly production of knowledge. Anthropology engages often with
feminists from non-Western traditions, whose perspectives and
experiences can differ from those of white European and American
feminists. Historically, such 'peripheral' perspectives have sometimes
been marginalized and regarded as less valid or important than knowledge
from the western world. Feminist anthropologists have claimed that their
research helps to correct this systematic bias in mainstream feminist
theory. Feminist anthropologists are centrally concerned with the
construction of gender across societies. Feminist anthropology is
inclusive of birth anthropology[54] as a specialization.

The first African-American female anthropologist and Caribbeanist is
said to be Vera Mae Green who studied ethnic and family relations in the
Caribbean as well as the United States, and thereby tried to improve the
way black life, experiences, and culture were studied.[55]

Medical, nutritional, psychological, cognitive and transpersonal

Medical

Medical anthropology is an interdisciplinary field which studies "human
health and disease, health care systems, and biocultural
adaptation".[56] It is believed that William Caudell was the first to
discover the field of medical anthropology. Currently, research in
medical anthropology is one of the main growth areas in the field of
anthropology as a whole. It focuses on the following six basic
fields:[57]

Other subjects that have become central to medical anthropology
worldwide are violence and social suffering (Farmer, 1999, 2003;
Beneduce, 2010) as well as other issues that involve physical and
psychological harm and suffering that are not a result of illness. On
the other hand, there are fields that intersect with medical
anthropology in terms of research methodology and theoretical
production, such as _cultural psychiatry_ and _transcultural psychiatry_
or _ethnopsychiatry_.

Nutritional

Nutritional anthropology is a synthetic concept that deals with the
interplay between economic systems, nutritional status and food
security, and how changes in the former affect the latter. If economic
and environmental changes in a community affect access to food, food
security, and dietary health, then this interplay between culture and
biology is in turn connected to broader historical and economic trends
associated with globalization. Nutritional status affects overall health
status, work performance potential, and the overall potential for
economic development (either in terms of human development or
traditional western models) for any given group of people.

Psychological

Psychological anthropology is an interdisciplinary subfield of
anthropology that studies the interaction of cultural and mental
processes. This subfield tends to focus on ways in which humans'
development and enculturation within a particular cultural group – with
its own history, language, practices, and conceptual categories – shape
processes of human cognition, emotion, perception, motivation, and
mental health.[58] It also examines how the understanding of cognition,
emotion, motivation, and similar psychological processes inform or
constrain our models of cultural and social processes.[59][60]

Cognitive

Cognitive anthropology seeks to explain patterns of shared knowledge,
cultural innovation, and transmission over time and space using the
methods and theories of the cognitive sciences (especially experimental
psychology and evolutionary biology) often through close collaboration
with historians, ethnographers, archaeologists, linguists, musicologists
and other specialists engaged in the description and interpretation of
cultural forms. Cognitive anthropology is concerned with what people
from different groups know and how that implicit knowledge changes the
way people perceive and relate to the world around them.[61]

Transpersonal

Transpersonal anthropology studies the relationship between altered
states of consciousness and culture. As with transpersonal psychology,
the field is much concerned with altered states of consciousness (ASC)
and transpersonal experience. However, the field differs from mainstream
transpersonal psychology in taking more cognizance of cross-cultural
issues – for instance, the roles of myth, ritual, diet, and texts in
evoking and interpreting extraordinary experiences.[62][63]

Political and legal

Political

Political anthropology concerns the structure of political systems,
looked at from the basis of the structure of societies. Political
anthropology developed as a discipline concerned primarily with politics
in stateless societies, a new development started from the 1960s, and is
still unfolding: anthropologists started increasingly to study more
"complex" social settings in which the presence of states, bureaucracies
and markets entered both ethnographic accounts and analysis of local
phenomena. The turn towards complex societies meant that political
themes were taken up at two main levels. Firstly, anthropologists
continued to study political organization and political phenomena that
lay outside the state-regulated sphere (as in patron-client relations or
tribal political organization). Secondly, anthropologists slowly started
to develop a disciplinary concern with states and their institutions
(and on the relationship between formal and informal political
institutions). An anthropology of the state developed, and it is a most
thriving field today. Geertz' comparative work on "Negara", the Balinese
state, is an early, famous example.

Legal

Legal anthropology or anthropology of law specializes in "the
cross-cultural study of social ordering".[64] Earlier legal
anthropological research often focused more narrowly on conflict
management, crime, sanctions, or formal regulation. More recent
applications include issues such as human rights, legal pluralism,[65]
and political uprisings.

Public

Public anthropology was created by Robert Borofsky, a professor at
Hawaii Pacific University, to "demonstrate the ability of anthropology
and anthropologists to effectively address problems beyond the
discipline – illuminating larger social issues of our times as well as
encouraging broad, public conversations about them with the explicit
goal of fostering social change".[66]

Nature, science and technology

Cyborg

Cyborg anthropology originated as a sub-focus group within the American
Anthropological Association's annual meeting in 1993. The sub-group was
very closely related to STS and the Society for the Social Studies of
Science.[67] Donna Haraway's 1985 _Cyborg Manifesto_ could be considered
the founding document of cyborg anthropology by first exploring the
philosophical and sociological ramifications of the term. Cyborg
anthropology studies humankind and its relations with the technological
systems it has built, specifically modern technological systems that
have reflexively shaped notions of what it means to be human beings.

Digital

Digital anthropology is the study of the relationship between humans and
digital-era technology, and extends to various areas where anthropology
and technology intersect. It is sometimes grouped with sociocultural
anthropology, and sometimes considered part of material culture. The
field is new, and thus has a variety of names with a variety of
emphases. These include techno-anthropology,[68] digital ethnography,
cyberanthropology,[69] and virtual anthropology.[70]

Ecological

Ecological anthropology is defined as the "study of cultural adaptations
to environments".[71] The sub-field is also defined as, "the study of
relationships between a population of humans and their biophysical
environment".[72] The focus of its research concerns "how cultural
beliefs and practices helped human populations adapt to their
environments, and how their environment across space and time.[73] The
contemporary perspective of environmental anthropology, and arguably at
least the backdrop, if not the focus of most of the ethnographies and
cultural fieldworks of today, is political ecology. Many characterize
this new perspective as more informed with culture, politics and power,
globalization, localized issues, century anthropology and more.[74] The
focus and data interpretation is often used for arguments for/against or
creation of policy, and to prevent corporate exploitation and damage of
land. Often, the observer has become an active part of the struggle
either directly (organizing, participation) or indirectly (articles,
documentaries, books, ethnographies). Such is the case with
environmental justice advocate Melissa Checker and her relationship with
the people of Hyde Park.[75]

Historical

Ethnohistory is the study of ethnographic cultures and indigenous
customs by examining historical records. It is also the study of the
history of various ethnic groups that may or may not exist today.
Ethnohistory uses both historical and ethnographic data as its
foundation. Its historical methods and materials go beyond the standard
use of documents and manuscripts. Practitioners recognize the utility of
such source material as maps, music, paintings, photography, folklore,
oral tradition, site exploration, archaeological materials, museum
collections, enduring customs, language, and place names.[76]

Religion

The anthropology of religion involves the study of religious
institutions in relation to other social institutions, and the
comparison of religious beliefs and practices across cultures. Modern
anthropology assumes that there is complete continuity between magical
thinking and religion,[77] and that every religion is a cultural
product, created by the human community that worships it.[78]

Urban

Urban anthropology is concerned with issues of urbanization, poverty,
and neoliberalism. Ulf Hannerz quotes a 1960s remark that traditional
anthropologists were "a notoriously agoraphobic lot, anti-urban by
definition". Various social processes in the Western World as well as in
the "Third World" (the latter being the habitual focus of attention of
anthropologists) brought the attention of "specialists in 'other
cultures'" closer to their homes.[79] There are two main approaches to
urban anthropology: examining the types of cities or examining the
social issues within the cities. These two methods are overlapping and
dependent of each other. By defining different types of cities, one
would use social factors as well as economic and political factors to
categorize the cities. By directly looking at the different social
issues, one would also be studying how they affect the dynamic of the
city.[80]


Key topics by field: archaeological and biological

Anthrozoology

Anthrozoology (also known as "human–animal studies") is the study of
interaction between living things. It is an interdisciplinary field that
overlaps with a number of other disciplines, including anthropology,
ethology, medicine, psychology, veterinary medicine and zoology. A major
focus of anthrozoologic research is the quantifying of the positive
effects of human-animal relationships on either party and the study of
their interactions.[81] It includes scholars from a diverse range of
fields, including anthropology, sociology, biology, and
philosophy.[82][83]

Biocultural

Biocultural anthropology is the scientific exploration of the
relationships between human biology and culture. Physical
anthropologists throughout the first half of the 20th century viewed
this relationship from a racial perspective; that is, from the
assumption that typological human biological differences lead to
cultural differences.[84] After World War II the emphasis began to shift
toward an effort to explore the role culture plays in shaping human
biology.

Evolutionary

Evolutionary anthropology is the interdisciplinary study of the
evolution of human physiology and human behaviour and the relation
between hominins and non-hominin primates. Evolutionary anthropology is
based in natural science and social science, combining the human
development with socioeconomic factors. Evolutionary anthropology is
concerned with both biological and cultural evolution of humans, past
and present. It is based on a scientific approach, and brings together
fields such as archaeology, behavioral ecology, psychology, primatology,
and genetics. It is a dynamic and interdisciplinary field, drawing on
many lines of evidence to understand the human experience, past and
present.

Forensic

Forensic anthropology is the application of the science of physical
anthropology and human osteology in a legal setting, most often in
criminal cases where the victim's remains are in the advanced stages of
decomposition. A forensic anthropologist can assist in the
identification of deceased individuals whose remains are decomposed,
burned, mutilated or otherwise unrecognizable. The adjective "forensic"
refers to the application of this subfield of science to a court of law.

Palaeoanthropology

Paleoanthropology combines the disciplines of paleontology and physical
anthropology. It is the study of ancient humans, as found in fossil
hominid evidence such as petrifacted bones and footprints. Genetics and
morphology of specimens are crucially important to this field.[85]
Markers on specimens, such as enamel fractures and dental decay on
teeth, can also give insight into the behaviour and diet of past
populations.[86]


Organizations

Contemporary anthropology is an established science with academic
departments at most universities and colleges. The single largest
organization of anthropologists is the American Anthropological
Association (AAA), which was founded in 1903.[87] Its members are
anthropologists from around the globe.[88]

In 1989, a group of European and American scholars in the field of
anthropology established the European Association of Social
Anthropologists (EASA) which serves as a major professional organization
for anthropologists working in Europe. The EASA seeks to advance the
status of anthropology in Europe and to increase visibility of
marginalized anthropological traditions and thereby contribute to the
project of a global anthropology or world anthropology.

Hundreds of other organizations exist in the various sub-fields of
anthropology, sometimes divided up by nation or region, and many
anthropologists work with collaborators in other disciplines, such as
geology, physics, zoology, paleontology, anatomy, music theory, art
history, sociology and so on, belonging to professional societies in
those disciplines as well.[89][90]

List of major organizations

-   American Anthropological Association
-   American Ethnological Society
-   Asociación de Antropólogos Iberoamericanos en Red, AIBR
-   Moving Anthropology Student Network
-   Anthropological Society of London
-   Center for World Indigenous Studies
-   Ethnological Society of London
-   Institute of Anthropology and Ethnography
-   Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology
-   Network of Concerned Anthropologists
-   N.N. Miklukho-Maklai Institute of Ethnology and Anthropology
-   Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland
-   Society for anthropological sciences
-   Society for Applied Anthropology
-   USC Center for Visual Anthropology


Ethics

As the field has matured it has debated and arrived at ethical
principles aimed at protecting both the subjects of anthropological
research as well as the researchers themselves, and professional
societies have generated codes of ethics.[91]

Anthropologists, like other researchers (especially historians and
scientists engaged in field research), have over time assisted state
policies and projects, especially colonialism.[92][93]

Some commentators have contended:

-   That the discipline grew out of colonialism, perhaps was in league
    with it, and derives some of its key notions from it, consciously or
    not. (See, for example, Gough, Pels and Salemink, but cf. Lewis
    2004).[94]
-   That ethnographic work is often ahistorical, writing about people as
    if they were "out of time" in an "ethnographic present" (Johannes
    Fabian, _Time and Its Other_).

Cultural relativism

As part of their quest for scientific objectivity, present-day
anthropologists typically urge cultural relativism, which has an
influence on all the sub-fields of anthropology.[95] This is the notion
that cultures should not be judged by another's values or viewpoints,
but be examined dispassionately on their own terms. There should be no
notions, in good anthropology, of one culture being better or worse than
another culture.[96][97]

Ethical commitments in anthropology include noticing and documenting
genocide, infanticide, racism, mutilation (including circumcision and
subincision), and torture. Topics like racism, slavery, and human
sacrifice attract anthropological attention and theories ranging from
nutritional deficiencies[98] to genes[99] to acculturation have been
proposed, not to mention theories of colonialism and many others as root
causes of Man's inhumanity to man. To illustrate the depth of an
anthropological approach, one can take just one of these topics, such as
"racism" and find thousands of anthropological references, stretching
across all the major and minor sub-fields.[100][101][102][103]

Military involvement

Anthropologists' involvement with the U.S. government, in particular,
has caused bitter controversy within the discipline. Franz Boas publicly
objected to US participation in World War I, and after the war he
published a brief expose and condemnation of the participation of
several American archaeologists in espionage in Mexico under their cover
as scientists.

But by the 1940s, many of Boas' anthropologist contemporaries were
active in the allied war effort against the Axis Powers (Nazi Germany,
Fascist Italy, and Imperial Japan). Many served in the armed forces,
while others worked in intelligence (for example, Office of Strategic
Services and the Office of War Information). At the same time, David H.
Price's work on American anthropology during the Cold War provides
detailed accounts of the pursuit and dismissal of several
anthropologists from their jobs for communist sympathies.

Attempts to accuse anthropologists of complicity with the CIA and
government intelligence activities during the Vietnam War years have
turned up surprisingly little. Many anthropologists (students and
teachers) were active in the antiwar movement. Numerous resolutions
condemning the war in all its aspects were passed overwhelmingly at the
annual meetings of the American Anthropological Association (AAA).

Professional anthropological bodies often object to the use of
anthropology for the benefit of the state. Their codes of ethics or
statements may proscribe anthropologists from giving secret briefings.
The Association of Social Anthropologists of the UK and Commonwealth
(ASA) has called certain scholarship ethically dangerous. The
Association of Social Anthropologists of the UK and Commonwealth (ASA)
has called certain scholarship ethically dangerous. The "Principles of
Professional Responsibility" issued by the American Anthropological
Association and amended through November 1986 stated that "in relation
with their own government and with host governments ... no secret
research, no secret reports or debriefings of any kind should be agreed
to or given."[104] The current "Principles of Professional
Responsibility" does not make explicit mention of ethics surrounding
state interactions.[105]

Anthropologists, along with other social scientists, are working with
the US military as part of the US Army's strategy in Afghanistan.[106]
The _Christian Science Monitor_ reports that "Counterinsurgency efforts
focus on better grasping and meeting local needs" in Afghanistan, under
the _Human Terrain System_ (HTS) program; in addition, HTS teams are
working with the US military in Iraq.[107] In 2009, the American
Anthropological Association's Commission on the Engagement of
Anthropology with the US Security and Intelligence Communities released
its final report concluding, in part, that, "When ethnographic
investigation is determined by military missions, not subject to
external review, where data collection occurs in the context of war,
integrated into the goals of counterinsurgency, and in a potentially
coercive environment – all characteristic factors of the HTS concept and
its application – it can no longer be considered a legitimate
professional exercise of anthropology. In summary, while we stress that
constructive engagement between anthropology and the military is
possible, CEAUSSIC suggests that the AAA emphasize the incompatibility
of HTS with disciplinary ethics and practice for job seekers and that it
further recognize the problem of allowing HTS to define the meaning of
"anthropology" within DoD."[108]


Post–World War II developments

Before WWII British 'social anthropology' and American 'cultural
anthropology' were still distinct traditions. After the war, enough
British and American anthropologists borrowed ideas and methodological
approaches from one another that some began to speak of them
collectively as 'sociocultural' anthropology.

Basic trends

There are several characteristics that tend to unite anthropological
work. One of the central characteristics is that anthropology tends to
provide a comparatively more holistic account of phenomena and tends to
be highly empirical.[109] The quest for holism leads most
anthropologists to study a particular place, problem or phenomenon in
detail, using a variety of methods, over a more extensive period than
normal in many parts of academia.

In the 1990s and 2000s, calls for clarification of what constitutes a
culture, of how an observer knows where his or her own culture ends and
another begins, and other crucial topics in writing anthropology were
heard. These dynamic relationships, between what can be observed on the
ground, as opposed to what can be observed by compiling many local
observations remain fundamental in any kind of anthropology, whether
cultural, biological, linguistic or archaeological.[110][111]

Biological anthropologists are interested in both human
variation[112][113] and in the possibility of human universals
(behaviors, ideas or concepts shared by virtually all human
cultures).[114][115] They use many different methods of study, but
modern population genetics, participant observation and other techniques
often take anthropologists "into the field," which means traveling to a
community in its own setting, to do something called "fieldwork." On the
biological or physical side, human measurements, genetic samples,
nutritional data may be gathered and published as articles or
monographs.

Along with dividing up their project by theoretical emphasis,
anthropologists typically divide the world up into relevant time periods
and geographic regions. Human time on Earth is divided up into relevant
cultural traditions based on material, such as the Paleolithic and the
Neolithic, of particular use in archaeology. Further cultural
subdivisions according to tool types, such as Olduwan or Mousterian or
Levalloisian help archaeologists and other anthropologists in
understanding major trends in the human past. Anthropologists and
geographers share approaches to culture regions as well, since mapping
cultures is central to both sciences. By making comparisons across
cultural traditions (time-based) and cultural regions (space-based),
anthropologists have developed various kinds of comparative method, a
central part of their science.

Commonalities between fields

Because anthropology developed from so many different enterprises (see
History of anthropology), including but not limited to fossil-hunting,
exploring, documentary film-making, paleontology, primatology, antiquity
dealings and curatorship, philology, etymology, genetics, regional
analysis, ethnology, history, philosophy, and religious
studies,[116][117] it is difficult to characterize the entire field in a
brief article, although attempts to write histories of the entire field
have been made.[118]

Some authors argue that anthropology originated and developed as the
study of "other cultures", both in terms of time (past societies) and
space (non-European/non-Western societies).[119] For example, the
classic of urban anthropology, Ulf Hannerz in the introduction to his
seminal _Exploring the City: Inquiries Toward an Urban Anthropology_
mentions that the "Third World" had habitually received most of
attention; anthropologists who traditionally specialized in "other
cultures" looked for them far away and started to look "across the
tracks" only in late 1960s.[120]

Now there exist many works focusing on peoples and topics very close to
the author's "home".[121] It is also argued that other fields of study,
like History and Sociology, on the contrary focus disproportionately on
the West.[122]

In France, the study of Western societies has been traditionally left to
sociologists, but this is increasingly changing,[123] starting in the
1970s from scholars like Isac Chiva and journals like _Terrain_
("fieldwork"), and developing with the center founded by Marc Augé (_Le
Centre d'anthropologie des mondes contemporains_, the Anthropological
Research Center of Contemporary Societies).

Since the 1980s it has become common for social and cultural
anthropologists to set ethnographic research in the North Atlantic
region, frequently examining the connections between locations rather
than limiting research to a single locale. There has also been a related
shift toward broadening the focus beyond the daily life of ordinary
people; increasingly, research is set in settings such as scientific
laboratories, social movements, governmental and nongovernmental
organizations and businesses.[124]


See also

-   Outline of anthropology
-   Anthropological science fiction
-   Christian anthropology, a sub-field of theology
-   Engaged theory
-   Ethnobiology
-   Human ethology
-   Human Relations Area Files
-   Intangible cultural heritage
-   List of anthropologists
-   Memetics
-   Origins of society
-   Philosophical anthropology, a sub-field of philosophy
-   Prehistoric medicine
-   Qualitative research


Notes


References


Further reading

Dictionaries and encyclopedias

-   -   -   -   -

Fieldnotes and memoirs

-   -   -   -   -   -   -

Histories

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   .

-   -   -   -   -

Textbooks and key theoretical works

-   Carneiro's circumscription theory
-   -   -   -   -   -


External links

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   (AIO)

Anthropology Category:Humanities

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13] _Oxford English Dictionary_, 1st ed. "anthropology, _n._" Oxford
University Press (Oxford), 1885.

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27] Hylland Eriksen, Thomas. (2004) "What is Anthropology" Pluto.
London. p. 79. .

[28]

[29] On varieties of cultural relativism in anthropology, see Spiro,
Melford E. (1987) "Some Reflections on Cultural Determinism and
Relativism with Special Reference to Emotion and Reason," in _Culture
and Human Nature: Theoretical Papers of Melford E. Spiro_. Edited by B.
Kilborne and L.L. Langness, pp. 32–58. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

[30]

[31] Layton, Robert (1998) _An Introduction to Theory in Anthropology_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[32] What is Anthropology – American Anthropological Association.
Aaanet.org. Retrieved on 2016-11-02.

[33] What is Anthropology. Living Anthropologically. Retrieved on
2017-17-01.

[34] Harris, Marvin. _The Rise of Anthropological Theory_. Alta Mira
Press. 2000 (revised from 1968); Harris, Marvin. _Theories of Culture in
Postmodern Times. Altamira. 1998_

[35]

[36]

[37] Geertz, Behar, Clifford & James

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45] Robbins, R.H. & Larkin, S.N. (2007). Cultural Anthropology: A
problem based approach. Toronto, ON: Nelson Education Ltd.

[46]

[47] Salzmann, Zdeněk. (1993) _Language, culture, and society: an
introduction to linguistic anthropology_. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

[48] Layton, Robert. (1981) _The Anthropology of Art_.

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67] Dumit, Joseph. Davis-Floyd, Robbie (2001). "Cyborg Anthropology".
in _Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women_. Routledge. .

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77] Cassirer, Ernst (1944) _An Essay On Man_, pt.II, ch.7 _Myth and
Religion_, pp. 122–123.

[78] Guthrie (2000) _Guide to the Study of Religion_. Bloomsbury
Academic. pp. 225–226. .

[79]

[80]

[81] Mills, Daniel S (2010). "Anthrozoology", _The Encyclopedia of
Applied Animal Behaviour and Welfare_. CABI, pp. 28–30. .

[82] DeMello, Margo (2010). _Teaching the Animal: Human–Animal Studies
Across the Disciplines_. Lantern Books. p. xi.

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87] AAAnet.org. AAAnet.org. Retrieved on 2016-11-02.

[88]

[89] Johanson, Donald and Wong, Kate (2007). _Lucy's Legacy_. Kindle
Books.

[90] Netti, Bruno (2005). _The Study of Ethnomusicology._ Ch. 1.
University of Illinois Press. .

[91]

[92] Asad, Talal, ed. (1973) _Anthropology & the Colonial Encounter._
Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.

[93] van Breman, Jan, and Akitoshi Shimizu (1999) _Anthropology and
Colonialism in Asia and Oceania_. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press.

[94] Gellner, Ernest (1992) _Postmodernism, Reason, and Religion_.
London/New York: Routledge. pp. 26–29. .

[95]

[96] Levi-Strauss, Claude (1962). _The Savage Mind_

[97] Womack, Mari (2001). _Being Human._.

[98] Harris, Marvin. _Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches_.

[99] Is there a gene for racism? | Times Higher Education (THE). Times
Higher Education (2016-10-27). Retrieved on 2016-11-02.

[100]

[101]

[102] Goodman, Allan (1995). "The Problematics of "Race" in Contemporary
Biological Anthropology." In _Biological Anthropology: The State of the
Science_. International Institute for Human Evolutionary Research. .

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106] US Army's strategy in Afghanistan: better anthropology.
CSMonitor.com (2007-09-07). Retrieved on 2016-11-02.

[107]

[108] "AAA Commission Releases Final Report on Army Human Terrain
System". American Anthropological Association (2009-12-08)

[109]

[110] Rosaldo, Renato (1993). _Culture and Truth: The remaking of social
analysis_. Beacon Press. Inda

[111] Xavier, John and Rosaldo, Renato (2007). _The Anthropology of
Globalization_. Wiley-Blackwell.

[112] Jurmain, Robert; Kilgore, Lynn; Trevathan, Wenda and Ciochon,
Russell L. (2007). _Introduction to Physical Anthropology_. 11th
Edition. Wadsworth. chapters I, III and IV. .

[113] Wompack, Mari (2001). _Being Human_. Prentice Hall. pp. 11–20.

[114] Brown, Donald (1991). _Human Universals_. McGraw Hill.

[115] Roughley, Neil (2000). _Being Humans: Anthropological Universality
and Particularity in Transciplinary Perspectives_. Walter de Gruyter
Publishing.

[116] Erickson, Paul A. and Liam D. Murphy (2003). _A History of
Anthropological Theory_. Broadview Press. pp. 11–12. .

[117] Stocking, George (1992) "Paradigmatic Traditions in the History of
Anthropology", pp. 342–361 in George Stocking, _The Ethnographer's Magic
and Other Essays in the History of Anthropology_. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press. .

[118] Leaf, Murray (1979). _Man, Mind and Science: A History of
Anthropology._ Columbia University Press.

[119] See the many essays relating to this in Prem Poddar and David
Johnson, Historical Companion to Postcolonial Thought in English,
Edinburgh University Press, 2004. See also Prem Poddar et al.,
Historical Companion to Postcolonial Literatures&nbsp– Continental
Europe and its Empires, Edinburgh University Press, 2008

[120] Hannerz, Ulf (1980) _Exploring the City: Inquiries Toward an Urban
Anthropology_, , p. 1. Columbia University Press.

[121] Lewis, Herbert S. (1998) _The Misrepresentation of Anthropology
and its Consequences_ _American Anthropologist_ "100:" 716–731

[122] Goody, Jack (2007) _The Theft of History_. Cambridge University
Press.

[123]

[124] Fischer, Michael M. J. (2003) _Emergent Forms of Life and the
Anthropological Voice_. Duke University Press.