ARRAIGNMENT is a formal reading of a criminal charging document in the
presence of the defendant to inform the defendant of the charges against
the defendant. In response to arraignment, the accused is expected to
enter a plea. Acceptable pleas vary among jurisdictions, but they
generally include "guilty", "not guilty", and the peremptory pleas (or
pleas in bar) setting out reasons why a trial cannot proceed. Pleas of
"nolo contendere" (no contest) and the "_Alford_ plea" are allowed in
some circumstances.


Australia

In Australia, arraignment is the first of eleven stages in a criminal
trial, and involves the clerk of the court reading out the indictment.
The judge will testify during the indictment process.


Canada

In every province in Canada except British Columbia, defendants are
arraigned on the day of their trial. In British Columbia, arraignment
takes places in one of the first few court appearances by the defendant
or their lawyer. The defendant is asked whether he or she pleads guilty
or not guilty to each charge.


France

In France, the general rule is that one cannot remain in police custody
for more than 24 hours from the time of the arrest.[1] However, police
custody can last another 24 hours in specific circumstances, especially
if the offence is punishable by at least one year's imprisonment, or if
the investigation is deemed to require the extra time, and can last up
to 96 hours in certain cases involving terrorism, drug trafficking or
organised crime.[2] The police needs to have the consent of the
prosecutor (in the vast majority of cases, the prosecutor will
consent).[3]


Germany

In Germany, if one has been arrested and taken into custody by the
police one must be brought before a judge as soon as possible and at the
latest on the day after the arrest.[4]


New Zealand

At the first appearance, the accused is read the charges and asked for a
plea. The available pleas are, guilty, not guilty, and no plea. No plea
allows the defendant to get legal advice on the plea, which must be made
on the second appearance.[5]


South Africa

In South Africa, arraignment is defined as the calling upon the accused
to appear, the informing of the accused of the crime charged against
him, the demanding of the accused whether he be guilty or not guilty,
and the entering of his plea. His plea having been entered he is said to
stand arraigned.


United Kingdom

In England, Wales, and Northern Ireland, arraignment is the first of
eleven stages in a criminal trial, and involves the clerk of the court
reading out the indictment.

In England and Wales, the police cannot legally detain anyone for more
than 24 hours without charging them unless an officer with the rank of
superintendent (or above) authorises detention for a further 12 hours
(36 hours total), or a judge (who will be a magistrate) authorises
detention by the police before charge for up to a maximum of 96 hours,
but for terrorism-related offences people can be held by the police for
up to 28 days before charge.[6] If they are not released after being
charged, they should be brought before a court as soon as
practicable.[7]


United States

Under the United States Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure,
"arraignment shall [...] [consist of an] open [...] reading [of] the
indictment [...] to the defendant [...] and call[] on him to plead
thereto. He/she shall be given a copy of the indictment [...] before
he/she is called upon to plead."[8]

In federal courts, arraignment takes place in two stages. The first is
called the initial arraignment and must take place within 48 hours of an
individual's arrest, 72 hours if the individual was arrested on the
weekend and not able to go before a judge until Monday.[9] During this
arraignment the defendant is informed of the pending legal charges and
is informed of his or her right to retain counsel. The presiding judge
also decides at what amount, if any, to set bail. During the second
arraignment, a post-indictment arraignment or PIA, the defendant is
allowed to enter a plea.

In New York, most people arrested must be released if they are not
arraigned within 24 hours.[10]

In California, arraignments must be conducted without unnecessary delay
and, in any event, within 48 hours of arrest, excluding weekends and
holidays.[11][12] Thus, an individual arrested without a warrant, in
some cases, may be held for as long as 168 hours (7 days) without
arraignment or charge.[13]


Form of the arraignment

The wording of the arraignment varies from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction.[14] However, it generally conforms with the following
principles:

1.  The accused person (defendant) is addressed by name;
2.  The charge against the accused person is read, including the alleged
    date, time, and place of offense (and sometimes the names of the
    state's witnesses and the range of punishment for the charge(s));
    and,
3.  The accused person is asked formally how he or she pleads.


Video arraignment

VIDEO ARRAIGNMENT is the act of conducting the arraignment process using
some form of videoconferencing technology. Use of video arraignment
system allows the courts to conduct the requisite arraignment process
without the need to transport the defendant to the courtroom by using an
audio-visual link between the location where the defendant is being held
and the courtroom.

Use of the video arraignment process addresses the problems associated
with having to transport defendants. The transportation of defendants
requires time, puts additional demands on the public safety
organizations to provide for the safety of the public, court personnel
and for the security of the population held in detention. It also
addresses the rising costs of transportation.


Guilty and not-guilty pleas

If the defendant pleads guilty, an evidentiary hearing usually follows.
The court is not required to accept a guilty plea. During the hearing,
the judge assesses the offense, the mitigating factors, and the
defendant's character, and passes sentence.

If the defendant pleads not guilty, a date is set for a preliminary
hearing or a trial.

In the past, a defendant who refused to plead (or "stood mute") was
subject to peine forte et dure (Law French for "strong and hard
punishment"). Today in common-law jurisdictions, the court enters a plea
of not guilty for a defendant who refuses to enter a plea.[15] The
rationale for this is the defendant's right to silence.


Pre-trial release

This is also often the stage at which arguments for or against pre-trial
release and bail may be made, depending on the alleged crime and
jurisdiction.


See also

-   Desk appearance ticket


References

Category:Legal terminology Category:Prosecution Category:United States
criminal procedure Category:Criminal law of the United Kingdom
Category:Australian criminal law

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] http://www.howtolaw.co/facing-criminal-charges-392160

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11] County of Riverside v. McLaughlin, 500 U.S. 44 (1991)

[12]  Spolin Law P.C.|website=www.spolinlaw.com|access-date=2016-12-03}}

[13]

[14] In some jurisdictions the wording of the arraignment is set by
statute or court practice direction.

[15] In Queensland, Australia, this matter is covered by statute. See
s601 of the Queensland Criminal Code.