The AUSTROASIATIC languages , also known as MON–KHMER ,[1] are a large
language family of Mainland Southeast Asia, also scattered throughout
parts of India, Bangladesh, Nepal and southern China. There are around
117 million speakers of Austroasiatic languages.[2] Of these languages,
only Vietnamese, Khmer, and Mon have a long-established recorded
history, and only Vietnamese and Khmer have official status as modern
national languages (in Vietnam and Cambodia, respectively). In Myanmar,
the Wa language is the de facto official language of Wa State. Santali
is recognized as a regional language of India. The rest of the languages
are spoken by minority groups and have no official status.

_Ethnologue_ identifies 168 Austroasiatic languages. These form thirteen
established families (plus perhaps Shompen, which is poorly attested, as
a fourteenth), which have traditionally been grouped into two, as
Mon–Khmer and Munda. However, one recent classification posits three
groups (Munda, Nuclear Mon-Khmer and Khasi–Khmuic),[3] while another has
abandoned Mon–Khmer as a taxon altogether, making it synonymous with the
larger family.[4]

Austroasiatic languages have a disjunct distribution across Southeast
Asia and parts of India, Bangladesh, Nepal and East Asia, separated by
regions where other languages are spoken. They appear to be the extant
autochthonous languages of Southeast Asia (excluding the Andaman
Islands), with the neighboring Indo-Aryan, Kra–Dai, Hmong-Mien,
Dravidian, Austronesian, and Sino-Tibetan languages being the result of
later migrations.[5]


Etymology

The name _Austroasiatic_ comes from a combination of the Latin words for
"South" and "Asia", hence "South Asia".


Typology

Regarding word structure, Austroasiatic languages are well known for
having an iambic "sesquisyllabic" pattern, with basic nouns and verbs
consisting of an initial, unstressed, reduced minor syllable followed by
a stressed, full syllable. This reduction of presyllables has led to a
variety among modern languages of phonological shapes of the same
original Proto-Austroasiatic prefixes, such as the causative prefix,
ranging from CVC syllables to consonant clusters to single consonants.
As for word formation, most Austroasiatic languages have a variety of
derivational prefixes, many have infixes, but suffixes are almost
completely non-existent in most branches except Munda, and a few
specialized exceptions in other Austroasiatic branches.[6]

The Austroasiatic languages are further characterized as having
unusually large vowel inventories and employing some sort of register
contrast, either between modal (normal) voice and breathy (lax) voice or
between modal voice and creaky voice.[7] Languages in the Pearic branch
and some in the Vietic branch can have a three- or even four-way voicing
contrast.

However, some Austroasiatic languages have lost the register contrast by
evolving more diphthongs or in a few cases, such as Vietnamese,
tonogenesis. Vietnamese has been so heavily influenced by Chinese that
its original Austroasiatic phonological quality is obscured and now
resembles that of South Chinese languages, whereas Khmer, which had more
influence from Sanskrit, has retained a more typically Austroasiatic
structure.


Proto-language

Much work has been done on the reconstruction of Proto-Mon–Khmer in
Harry L. Shorto's _Mon–Khmer Comparative Dictionary_. Little work has
been done on the Munda languages, which are not well documented. With
their demotion from a primary branch, Proto-Mon–Khmer becomes synonymous
with Proto-Austroasiatic.

Paul Sidwell (2005) reconstructs the consonant inventory of
Proto-Mon–Khmer as follows:

  ---- -------- ---- ---- ----
  *p   *t       *c   *k   *ʔ
  *b   *d       *ɟ   *ɡ
  *ɓ   *ɗ       *ʄ
  *m   *n       *ɲ   *ŋ
  *w   *l, *r   *j
       *s                 *h
  ---- -------- ---- ---- ----

This is identical to earlier reconstructions except for . is better
preserved in the Katuic languages, which Sidwell has specialized in.
Sidwell (2011) suggests that the likely homeland of Austroasiatic is the
middle Mekong, in the area of the Bahnaric and Katuic languages
(approximately where modern Laos, Thailand, and Cambodia come together),
and that the family is not as old as frequently assumed, dating to
perhaps 2000 BCE.[8] Peiros (2011) criticized Sidwell's theory heavily
and calls it a bunch of contradictions. He show with his analysis that
the homeland of Austroasiatic is somewhere near the Yangtze. He suggests
the Sichuan Basin as likely homeland of proto-Austroasiatic before they
migrated to other parts of central and southern China and than into
Southeast Asia. He further suggests that the family must be as old as
proto-Austronesian and proto-Sinotibetan or even older.[9]

Georg van Driem (2011) proposes that the homeland of Austroasiatic is
somewhere in southern China. He suggests that the region around the
Pearl River (China) is the likely homeland of the Austroasiatic
languages and people. He further suggests, based on genetic studies,
that the migration of Kra–Dai people from Taiwan replaced the original
Austroasiatic language but the effect on the people was only minor.
Local Austroasiatic speakers adopted Kra-Dai languages and partially
their culture.[10]

The linguists Sagart (2011) and Bellwood (2013) support the theory of an
origin of Austroasiatic along the Yangtze river in southern China.[11]

A genetic and linguistic research in 2015 about ancient people in East
Asia suggest an origin and homeland of Austroasiatic in today southern
China or even further north.[12]


Internal classification

Linguists traditionally recognize two primary divisions of
Austroasiatic: the Mon–Khmer languages of Southeast Asia, Northeast
India and the Nicobar Islands, and the Munda languages of East and
Central India and parts of Bangladesh, parts of Nepal. However, no
evidence for this classification has ever been published.

Each of the families that is written in boldface type below is accepted
as a valid clade. By contrast, the relationships _between_ these
families within Austroasiatic are debated. In addition to the
traditional classification, two recent proposals are given, neither of
which accepts traditional "Mon–Khmer" as a valid unit. However, little
of the data used for competing classifications has ever been published,
and therefore cannot be evaluated by peer review.

In addition, there are suggestions that additional branches of
Austroasiatic might be preserved in substrata of Acehnese in Sumatra
(Diffloth), the Chamic languages of Vietnam, and the Land Dayak
languages of Borneo (Adelaar 1995).[13]

Diffloth (1974)

Diffloth's widely cited original classification, now abandoned by
Diffloth himself, is used in _Encyclopædia Britannica_ and—except for
the breakup of Southern Mon–Khmer—in _Ethnologue._

-   MUNDA
    -   North Munda
        -   Korku
        -   KHERWARIAN
    -   South Munda
        -   KHARIA–JUANG
        -   KORAPUT MUNDA
-   Mon–Khmer
    -   Eastern Mon–Khmer
        -   KHMER (Cambodian)
        -   PEARIC
        -   BAHNARIC
        -   KATUIC
        -   VIETIC (includes Vietnamese)
    -   Northern Mon–Khmer
        -   KHASI (Meghalaya, India)
        -   PALAUNGIC
        -   KHMUIC
    -   Southern Mon–Khmer
        -   MON
        -   ASLIAN (Malaya)
        -   NICOBARESE (Nicobar Islands)

Peiros (2004)

Peiros is a lexicostatistic classification, based on percentages of
shared vocabulary. This means that languages can appear to be more
distantly related than they actually are due to language contact.
Indeed, when Sidwell (2009) replicated Peiros's study with languages
known well enough to account for loans, he did not find the internal
(branching) structure below. AustroAsiatic_tree_Peiros2004.png

-   NICOBARESE
-   Munda–Khmer
    -   MUNDA
    -   Mon–Khmer
        -   KHASI
        -   Nuclear Mon–Khmer
            -   Mangic (Mang + Palyu) (perhaps in Northern MK)
            -   VIETIC (perhaps in Northern MK)
            -   Northern Mon–Khmer
                -   PALAUNGIC
                -   KHMUIC
            -   Central Mon–Khmer
                -   KHMER dialects
                -   PEARIC
                -   Asli-Bahnaric
                    -   ASLIAN
                    -   Mon–Bahnaric
                        -   MONIC
                        -   Katu–Bahnaric
                            -   KATUIC
                            -   BAHNARIC

Diffloth (2005)

Diffloth compares reconstructions of various clades, and attempts to
classify them based on shared innovations, though like other
classifications the evidence has not been published. As a schematic, we
have:

Or in more detail,

-   MUNDA LANGUAGES (India)

:* KORAPUT: 7 languages

:*Core Munda languages

::* KHARIAN–JUANG: 2 languages

::*North Munda languages



        _Korku_
        KHERWARIAN: 12 languages

-   Khasi–Khmuic languages (Northern Mon–Khmer)

:* KHASIAN: 3 languages of north eastern India and adjacent region of
Bangladesh

:*Palaungo-Khmuic languages

::* KHMUIC: 13 languages of Laos and Thailand

::*Palaungo-Pakanic languages



        PAKANIC or PALYU: 4 or 5 languages of southern China and Vietnam
        PALAUNGIC: 21 languages of Burma, southern China, and Thailand

-   Nuclear Mon–Khmer languages

:* Khmero-Vietic languages (Eastern Mon–Khmer)

::* Vieto-Katuic languages ?[14]



        VIETIC: 10 languages of Vietnam and Laos, including the
        Vietnamese language, which has the most speakers of any
        Austroasiatic language.
        KATUIC: 19 languages of Laos, Vietnam, and Thailand.

::* Khmero-Bahnaric languages

:::* BAHNARIC: 40 languages of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia.

:::*Khmeric languages



        The KHMER dialects of Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam.
        PEARIC: 6 languages of Cambodia.

:* Nico-Monic languages (Southern Mon–Khmer)

::* NICOBARESE: 6 languages of the Nicobar Islands, a territory of
India.

::* Asli-Monic languages



        ASLIAN: 19 languages of peninsular Malaysia and Thailand.
        MONIC: 2 languages, the Mon language of Burma and the Nyahkur
        language of Thailand.

This family tree is consistent with recent studies of migration of
Y-Chromosomal haplogroup O2a1-M95. However, the dates obtained from by
Zhivotovsky method DNA studies are several times older than that given
by linguists.[15] The route map of the people with haplogroup O2a1-M95,
speaking this language can be seen in this link.[16] Other geneticists
criticise the Zhivotovsky method.

Previously existent branches

Roger Blench (2009)[17] also proposes that there might have been other
primary branches of Austroasiatic that are now extinct, based on
substrate evidence in modern-day languages.

-   PRE-CHAMIC LANGUAGES (the languages of coastal Vietnam prior to the
    Chamic migrations). Chamic has various Austroasiatic loanwords that
    cannot be clearly traced to existing Austroasiatic branches (Sidwell
    2006, 2007).[18][19] Larish (1999)[20] also notes that Moklenic
    languages contain many Austroasiatic loanwords, some of which are
    similar to the ones found in Chamic.
-   ACEHNESE SUBSTRATUM (Sidwell 2006).[21] Acehnese has many basic
    words that are of Austroasiatic origin, suggesting that either
    Austronesian speakers have absorbed earlier Austroasiatic residents
    in northern Sumatra, or that words might have been borrowed from
    Austroasiatic languages in southern Vietnam – or perhaps a
    combination of both. Sidwell (2006) argues that Acehnese and Chamic
    had often borrowed Austroasiatic words independently of each other,
    while some Austroasiatic words can be traced back to
    Proto-Aceh-Chamic. Sidwell (2006) accepts that Acehnese and Chamic
    are related, but that they had separated from each other before
    Chamic had borrowed most of its Austroasiatic lexicon.
-   BORNEAN SUBSTRATE LANGUAGES (Blench 2010).[22] Blench cites
    Austroasiatic-origin words in modern-day Bornean branches such as
    Land Dayak (Bidayuh, Dayak Bakatiq, etc.), Dusunic (Central Dusun,
    Visayan, etc.), Kayan, and Kenyah, noting especially resemblances
    with Aslian. As further evidence for his proposal, Blench also cites
    ethnographic evidence such as musical instruments in Borneo shared
    in common with Austroasiatic-speaking groups in mainland Southeast
    Asia. Adelaar (1995)[23] has also noticed phonological and lexical
    similarities between Land Dayak and Aslian.
-   LEPCHA SUBSTRATUM ("_RONGIC_").[24] Many words of Austroasiatic
    origin have been noticed in Lepcha, suggesting a Sino-Tibetan
    superstrate laid over an Austroasiatic substrate. Blench (2013)
    calls this branch "_Rongic_" based on the Lepcha autonym _Róng_.

Other languages with proposed Austroasiatic substrata are:

-   JIAMAO, based on evidence from the register system of Jiamao, a Hlai
    language (Thurgood 1992).[25] Jiamao is known for its highly
    aberrant vocabulary in relation to other Hlai languages.
-   KERINCI: van Reijn (1974)[26] notes that Kerinci, a Malayic language
    of central Sumatra, shares many phonological similarities with
    Austroasiatic languages, such as sesquisyllabic word structure and
    vowel inventory.

John Peterson (2017)[27] suggests that "pre-Munda" languages may have
once dominated the eastern Indo-Gangetic Plain, and were then absorbed
by Indo-Aryan languages at an early date as Indo-Aryan spread east.
Peterson notes that eastern Indo-Aryan languages display many
morphosyntactic features similar to those of Munda languages, while
western Indo-Aryan languages do not.

Sidwell (2009, 2011)

Mekong_river_basin.png and Roger Blench propose that the Austroasiatic
phylum had dispersed via the Mekong River drainage basin.]] Paul Sidwell
(2009), in a lexicostatistical comparison of 36 languages which are well
known enough to exclude loan words, finds little evidence for internal
branching, though he did find an area of increased contact between the
Bahnaric and Katuic languages, such that languages of all branches apart
from the geographically distant Munda and Nicobarese show greater
similarity to Bahnaric and Katuic the closer they are to those branches,
without any noticeable innovations common to Bahnaric and Katuic.

He therefore takes the conservative view that the thirteen branches of
Austroasiatic should be treated as equidistant on current evidence.
Sidwell & Blench (2011) discuss this proposal in more detail, and note
that there is good evidence for a Khasi–Palaungic node, which could also
possibly be closely related to Khmuic.[28]

If this would the case, Sidwell & Blench suggest that Khasic may have
been an early offshoot of Palaungic that had spread westward. Sidwell &
Blench (2011) suggest Shompen as an additional branch, and believe that
a Vieto-Katuic connection is worth investigating. In general, however,
the family is thought to have diversified too quickly for a deeply
nested structure to have developed, since Proto-Austroasiatic speakers
are believed by Sidwell to have radiated out from the central Mekong
river valley relatively quickly.

Subsequently, Sidwell (2015a: 179)[29] proposed that Nicobarese
subgroups with Aslian, just as how Khasian and Palaungic subgroup with
each other. A subsequent computational phylogenetic analysis of the
Austroasiatic language family by Sidwell (2015b)[30] suggests that
Austroasiatic branches may have a loosely nested structure rather than a
completely rake-like structure, with an east-west division (consisting
of Munda, Khasic, Palaungic, and Khmuic forming a western group as
opposed to all of the other branches) occurring possibly as early as
7,000 years before present.

Integrating computational phylogenetic linguistics with recent
archaeological findings, Paul Sidwell (2015c)[31] further expanded his
Mekong riverine hypothesis by proposing that Austroasiatic had
ultimately expanded into Indochina from the Lingnan area of southern
China, with the subsequent Mekong riverine dispersal taking place after
the initial arrival of Neolithic farmers from southern China.

Sidwell (2015c) tentatively suggests that Austroasiatic may have begun
to split up 5,000 years B.P. during the Neolithic transition era of
mainland Southeast Asia, with all the major branches of Austroasiatic
formed by 4,000 B.P. Austroasiatic would have had two possible dispersal
routes from the western periphery of the Pearl River watershed of
Lingnan, which would have been either a coastal route down the coast of
Vietnam, or downstream through the Mekong River via Yunnan.[32] Both the
reconstructed lexicon of Proto-Austroasiatic and the archaeological
record clearly show that early Austroasiatic speakers around 4,000 B.P.
cultivated rice and millet, kept livestock such as dogs, pigs, and
chickens, and thrived mostly in estuarine rather than coastal
environments.[33]

At 4,500 B.P., this "Neolithic package" suddenly arrived in Indochina
from the Lingnan area without cereal grains and displaced the earlier
pre-Neolithic hunter-gatherer cultures, with grain husks found in
northern Indochina by 4,100 B.P. and in southern Indochina by 3,800
B.P.[34] However, Sidwell (2015c) found that iron is not reconstructable
in Proto-Austroasiatic, since each Austroasiatic branch has different
terms for iron that had been borrowed relatively lately from Tai,
Chinese, Tibetan, Malay, and other languages.

During the Iron Age about 2,500 B.P., relatively young Austroasiatic
branches in Indochina such as Vietic, Katuic, Pearic, and Khmer were
formed, while the more internally diverse Bahnaric branch (dating to
about 3,000 B.P.) underwent more extensive internal diversification.[35]
By the Iron Age, all of the Austroasiatic branches were more or less in
their present-day locations, with most of the diversification within
Austroasiatic taking place during the Iron Age.[36]

Paul Sidwell (2018)[37] considers the Austroasiatic language family to
have rapidly diversified around 4,000 years B.P. during the arrival of
rice agriculture in Indochina, but notes that the origin of
Proto-Austroasiatic itself is older than that date. The lexicon of
Proto-Austroasiatic can be divided into an early and late stratum. The
early stratum consists of basic lexicon including body parts, animal
names, natural features, and pronouns, while the names of cultural items
(agriculture terms and words for cultural artifacts, which are
reconstructable in Proto-Austroasiatic) form part of the later stratum.

Roger Blench (2017)[38] suggests that vocabulary related to aquatic
subsistence strategies (such as boats, waterways, river fauna, and fish
capture techniques), can be reconstructed for Proto-Austroasiatic.
Blench (2017) finds widespread Austroasiatic roots for 'river, valley',
'boat', 'fish', 'catfish sp.', 'eel', 'prawn', 'shrimp' (Central
Austroasiatic), 'crab', 'tortoise', 'turtle', 'otter', 'crocodile',
'heron, fishing bird', and 'fish trap'. Archaeological evidence for the
presence of agriculture in northern Indochina (northern Vietnam, Laos,
and other nearby areas) dates back to only about 4,000 years B.P. (2,000
B.C.), with agriculture ultimately being introduced from further up to
the north in the Yangtze valley where it has been dated to 6,000
B.P.[39]

Hence, this points to a relatively late riverine dispersal of
Austroasiatic as compared to Sino-Tibetan, whose speakers had a distinct
non-riverine culture. In addition to living an aquatic-based lifestyle,
early Austroasiatic speakers would have also had access to livestock,
crops, and newer types of watercraft. As early Austroasiatic speakers
dispersed rapidly via waterways, they would have encountered speakers of
older language families who were already settled in the area, such as
Sino-Tibetan.[40]


Writing systems

Other than Latin-based alphabets, many Austroasiatic languages are
written with the Khmer, Thai, Lao, and Burmese alphabets. Vietnamese
divergently had an indigenous script based on Chinese logographic
writing. This has since been supplanted by the Latin alphabet in the
20th century. The following are examples of past-used alphabets or
current alphabets of Austroasiatic languages.

-   Chữ Nôm[41]
-   Khmer alphabet[42]
-   Khom script (used for a short period in the early 20th century for
    indigenous languages in Laos)
-   Mon script
-   Mundari Bani (Mundari alphabet)
-   Ol Chiki alphabet (Santali alphabet)[43]
-   Pahawh Hmong was once used to write Khmu, under the name "Pahawh
    Khmu"
-   Sorang Sompeng alphabet (Sora alphabet)[44]
-   Tai Le (Palaung, Blang)
-   Tai Tham (Blang)
-   Warang Citi (Ho alphabet)[45]


External relations

Austric languages

Austroasiatic is an integral part of the controversial Austric
hypothesis, which also includes the Austronesian languages, and in some
proposals also the Japonic languages.[46]

A 2015 analysis using the Automated Similarity Judgment Program resulted
in possible support for the Austro-Tai (but emphatically not Austric)
languages. In this analysis, the supposed "Austric" family was divided
into two separate, unrelated clades: Austro-Tai and
Austroasiatic-Japonic.[47] Note however that ASJP is not widely accepted
among historical linguists as an adequate method to establish or
evaluate relationships between language families.[48]

Hmong-Mien

Several lexical resemblances are found between the Hmong-Mien and
Austroasiatic language families (Ratliff 2010), some of which had
earlier been proposed by Haudricourt (1951). This could imply a relation
or early language contact along the Yangtze.[49]

According to Cai (et al. 2011), Hmong–Mien is at least partially related
to Austroasiatic but was heavily influenced by Sino-Tibetan, especially
Tibeto-Burman languages.[50]

Indo-Aryan languages

It is suggested that the Austroasiatic languages have some influence on
Indo-Aryan languages including Sanskrit and middle Indo-Aryan languages.
Indian linguist Suniti Kumar Chatterji pointed that a specific number of
substantives in languages such as Hindi, Punjabi and Bengali were
borrowed from Munda languages. Additionally, French linguist Jean
Przyluski suggested a similarity between the tales from the
Austroasiatic realm and the Indian mythological stories of Matsyagandha
(from _Mahabharata_) and the Nāgas.[51]


Austroasiatic migrations

Mitsuru Sakitani suggests that Haplogroup O1b1, which is common in
Austroasiatic people and some other ethnic groups in southern China, and
haplogroup O1b2, which is common in today Koreans, Japanese and some
Manchu, are the carriers of Yangtze civilization (Baiyue).[52] Another
study suggests that the haplogroup O1b1 is the major Austroasiatic
paternal lineage.[53]

Migration into India

According to Chaubey et al., "Austro-Asiatic speakers in India today are
derived from dispersal from Southeast Asia, followed by extensive
sex-specific admixture with local Indian populations." According to
Riccio et al., the Munda people are likely descended from Austroasiatic
migrants from Southeast Asia.[54][55]

According to Zhang et al., Austroasiatic migrations from Southeast Asia
into India took place after the last Glacial maximum, circa 10,000 years
ago. Arunkumar et al. suggest Austroasiatic migrations from Southeast
Asia occurred into Northeast India 5.2 ± 0.6 kya and into East India
4.3 ± 0.2 kya.[56]


See also

-   Munda languages


Notes


References


Sources

-   Adams, K. L. (1989). _Systems of numeral classification in the
    Mon–Khmer, Nicobarese and Aslian subfamilies of Austroasiatic_.
    Canberra, A.C.T., Australia: Dept. of Linguistics, Research School
    of Pacific Studies, Australian National University.
-   -   Alves, Mark J. (2015). Morphological functions among Mon-Khmer
    languages: beyond the basics. In N. J. Enfield & Bernard Comrie
    (eds.), _Languages of Mainland Southeast Asia: the state of the
    art_. Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton, 531–557.
-   Bradley, David (2012). "Languages and Language Families in China",
    in Rint Sybesma (ed.), _Encyclopedia of Chinese Language and
    Linguistics_.
-   Chakrabarti, Byomkes. (1994). _A Comparative Study of Santali and
    Bengali_.
-   -   Diffloth, Gérard. (2005). "The contribution of linguistic
    palaeontology and Austro-Asiatic". in Laurent Sagart, Roger Blench
    and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas, eds. _The Peopling of East Asia: Putting
    Together Archaeology, Linguistics and Genetics._ 77–80. London:
    Routledge Curzon.
-   Filbeck, D. (1978). _T'in: a historical study_. Pacific linguistics,
    no. 49. Canberra: Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific
    Studies, Australian National University.
-   Hemeling, K. (1907). _Die Nanking Kuanhua_. (German language)
-   Jenny, Mathias and Paul Sidwell, eds (2015). _The Handbook of
    Austroasiatic Languages_. Leiden: Brill.
-   Peck, B. M., Comp. (1988). _An Enumerative Bibliography of South
    Asian Language Dictionaries_.
-   Peiros, Ilia. 1998. _Comparative Linguistics in Southeast Asia._
    Pacific Linguistics Series C, No. 142. Canberra: Australian National
    University.
-   Shorto, Harry L. edited by Sidwell, Paul, Cooper, Doug and Bauer,
    Christian (2006). _A Mon–Khmer comparative dictionary_. Canberra:
    Australian National University. Pacific Linguistics.
-   Shorto, H. L. _Bibliographies of Mon–Khmer and Tai Linguistics_.
    London oriental bibliographies, v. 2. London: Oxford University
    Press, 1963.
-   Sidwell, Paul. (2005). "Proto-Katuic Phonology and the Sub-grouping
    of Mon–Khmer Languages". In Sidwell, ed., _SEALSXV: papers from the
    15th meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistic Society._
-   -   -   van Driem, George. (2007). Austroasiatic phylogeny and the
    Austroasiatic homeland in light of recent population genetic
    studies. _Mon-Khmer Studies, 37_, 1-14.
-   Zide, Norman H., and Milton E. Barker. (1966) _Studies in
    Comparative Austroasiatic Linguistics_, The Hague: Mouton
    (Indo-Iranian monographs, v. 5.).
-


Further reading

-   Mann, Noel, Wendy Smith and Eva Ujlakyova. 2009. _Linguistic
    clusters of Mainland Southeast Asia: an overview of the language
    families._ Chiang Mai: Payap University.
-   -   -   Sidwell, Paul. 2016. Bibliography of Austroasiatic
    linguistics and related resources.


External links

-   Swadesh lists for Austro-Asiatic languages (from Wiktionary's
    wikt:Appendix:Swadesh lists Swadesh-list appendix)
-   Austro-Asiatic at the Linguist List MultiTree Project (not
    functional as of 2014): Genealogical trees attributed to Sebeok
    1942, Pinnow 1959, Diffloth 2005, and Matisoff 2006
-   Mon–Khmer.com: Lectures by Paul Sidwell
-   Mon–Khmer Languages Project at SEAlang
-   Munda Languages Project at SEAlang
-   http://projekt.ht.lu.se/rwaai RWAAI (Repository and Workspace for
    Austroasiatic Intangible Heritage)
-   http://hdl.handle.net/10050/00-0000-0000-0003-66A4-2@view RWAAI
    Digital Archive
-   http://lacito.vjf.cnrs.fr/pangloss/languages/AA_Ferlus_en.php Michel
    Ferlus's recordings of Mon-Khmer (Austroasiatic) languages (CNRS)

Category:Agglutinative languages Austroasiatic_languages
Category:Language families Category:Sino-Austronesian languages

[1] Bradley (2012) notes, _MK in the wider sense including the Munda
languages of eastern South Asia is also known as Austroasiatic._

[2]

[3] Diffloth 2005

[4] Sidwell 2009

[5]

[6] Alves 2014, 2015

[7] Diffloth, Gérard (1989). "Proto-Austroasiatic creaky voice."

[8]

[9]

[10] van Driem, George. (2011). Rice and the Austroasiatic and
Hmong-Mien homelands. In N. J. Enfield (Ed.), _Dynamics of Human
Diversity: The Case of Mainland Southeast Asia_ (pp. 361-390). Canberra:
Pacific Linguistics.

[11] Reconstructing Austroasiatic prehistory. In P. Sidwell & M. Jenny
(Eds.), _The Handbook of Austroasiatic Languages_. Leiden: Brill. (Page
1: “Sagart (2011) and Bellwood (2013) favour the middle Yangzi”

[12]

[13] Roger Blench, _2009. Are there four additional unrecognised
branches of Austroasiatic?_ Presentation at ICAAL-4, Bangkok, 29–30
October. Summarized in Sidwell and Blench (2011).

[14] Sidwell (2005) casts doubt on Diffloth's Vieto-Katuic hypothesis,
saying that the evidence is ambiguous, and that it is not clear where
Katuic belongs in the family.

[15]

[16]

[17] Blench, Roger. 2009. "Are there four additional unrecognised
branches of Austroasiatic?."

[18] Sidwell, Paul. 2006. "Dating the Separation of Acehnese and Chamic
By Etymological Analysis of the Aceh-Chamic Lexicon ." In The _Mon-Khmer
Studies Journal_, 36: 187–206.

[19] Sidwell, Paul. 2007. "The Mon-Khmer Substrate in Chamic: Chamic,
Bahnaric and Katuic Contact." In SEALS XII Papers from the 12th Annual
Meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society 2002, edited by
Ratree Wayland et al.. Canberra, Australia, 113-128. Pacific
Linguistics, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, The
Australian National University.

[20] Larish, Michael David. 1999. _The Position of Moken and Moklen
Within the Austronesian Language Family_. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Hawai'i at Mānoa.

[21]

[22] Blench, Roger. 2010. "Was there an Austroasiatic Presence in Island
Southeast Asia prior to the Austronesian Expansion?" In _Bulletin of the
Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association_, Vol. 30.

[23] Adelaar, K.A. 1995. Borneo as a cross-roads for comparative
Austronesian linguistics. In P. Bellwood, J.J. Fox and D. Tryon (eds.),
The Austronesians, pp. 81-102. Canberra: Australian National University.

[24] Blench, Roger. 2013. _Rongic: a vanished branch of Austroasiatic_.
m.s.

[25] Thurgood, Graham. 1992. "The aberrancy of the Jiamao dialect of
Hlai: speculation on its origins and history". In Ratliff, Martha S. and
Schiller, E. (eds.), _Papers from the First Annual Meeting of the
Southeast Asian Linguistics Society_, 417–433. Arizona State University,
Program for Southeast Asian Studies.

[26] van Reijn, E. O. (1974). "Some Remarks on the Dialects of North
Kerintji: A link with Mon-Khmer Languages." _Journal of the Malaysian
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society_, 31, 2: 130–138. .

[27] Peterson, John (2017). "The prehistorical spread of Austro-Asiatic
in South Asia". Presented at ICAAL 7, Kiel, Germany.

[28] Sidwell, Paul, and Roger Blench. 2011. "The Austroasiatic Urheimat:
the Southeastern Riverine Hypothesis." Enfield, NJ (ed.) _Dynamics of
Human Diversity_, 317–345. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.

[29] Sidwell, Paul. 2015a. "Austroasiatic classification." In Jenny,
Mathias and Paul Sidwell, eds (2015). _The Handbook of Austroasiatic
Languages_. Leiden: Brill.

[30] Sidwell, Paul. 2015b. A comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of the
Austroasiatic languages. Presented at Diversity Linguistics: Retrospect
and Prospect, 1–3 May 2015 (Leipzig, Germany), Closing conference of the
Department of Linguistics at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology.

[31] Sidwell, Paul. 2015c. _Phylogeny, innovations, and correlations in
the prehistory of Austroasiatic_. Paper presented at the workshop
_Integrating inferences about our past: new findings and current issues
in the peopling of the Pacific and South East Asia_, June 22nd – June
23rd, 2015, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena,
Germany.

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37] Sidwell, Paul. 2018. _Austroasiatic deep chronology and the problem
of cultural lexicon_. Paper presented at the 28th Annual Meeting of the
Southeast Asian Linguistics Society, held May 17–19, 2018 in Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

[38] Blench, Roger. 2017. _Waterworld: lexical evidence for aquatic
subsistence strategies in Austroasiatic_. Presented at ICAAL 7, Kiel,
Germany.

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46] Schmidt, Wilhelm (1930). ""Die Beziehungen der austrischen Sprachen
zum Japanischen", 'The connections of the Austric languages to
Japanese'". _Wiener Beitrag zur Kulturgeschichte und Linguistik_. 1:
239–51.

[47]

[48] Cf. comments by Adelaar, Blust and Campbell in Holman, Eric W., et
al. (2011) "Automated Dating of the World’s Language Families Based on
Lexical Similarity." _Current Anthropology_, vol. 52, no. 6, pp.
841–875.

[49] Haudricourt, André-Georges. 1951. Introduction à la phonologie
historique des langues miao-yao [An introduction to the historical
phonology of the Miao-Yao languages]. _Bulletin de l’École Française
d'Extrême-Orient_ 44(2). 555–576.

[50]

[51]

[52] 崎谷満『DNA・考古・言語の学際研究が示す新・日本列島史』（勉誠出版　2009年）　

[53]

[54]

[55] The Language Gulper, _Austroasiatic Languages_

[56]