_BACILLUS_ (Latin "stick") is a genus of Gram-positive, rod-shaped bacteria, a member of the phylum Firmicutes, with 266 named species. The term is also used to describe the shape (rod) of certain bacteria; and the plural _Bacilli_ is the name of the class of bacteria to which this genus belongs. _Bacillus_ species can be either obligate aerobes: oxygen dependent; or facultative anaerobes: having the ability to be anaerobic in the absence of oxygen. Cultured _Bacillus_ species test positive for the enzyme catalase if oxygen has been used or is present.[1]

_Bacillus_ can reduce themselves to oval endospores and can remain in this dormant state for years. The endospore of one species from Morocco is reported to have survived being heated to 420 °C. [2] Endospore formation is usually triggered by a lack of nutrients: the bacterium divides within its cell wall, and one side then engulfs the other. They are not true spores (i.e., not an offspring).[3] Endospore formation originally defined the genus, but not all such species are closely related, and many species have been moved to other genera of the Firmicutes.[4]

Ubiquitous in nature, _Bacillus_ includes both free-living (nonparasitic) species, and two parasitic pathogenic species. These two _Bacillus_ species are medically significant: _B. anthracis_ causes anthrax; and _B. cereus_ causes food poisoning.

Many species of _Bacillus_ can produce copious amounts of enzymes which are used in various industries, such as the production of alpha amylase used in starch hydrolysis, and the protease subtilisin used in detergents. _B. subtilis_ is a valuable model for bacterial research. Some _Bacillus_ species can synthesize and secrete molecules belonging to the family of lipopetides, in particular surfactins and mycosubtilins[5] [6].


Structure

Cell wall

The cell wall of _Bacillus_ is a structure on the outside of the cell that forms the second barrier between the bacterium and the environment, and at the same time maintains the rod shape and withstands the pressure generated by the cell's turgor. The cell wall is composed of teichoic and teichuronic acids. _B. subtilis_ is the first bacterium for which the role of an actin-like cytoskeleton in cell shape determination and peptidoglycan synthesis was identified, and for which the entire set of peptidoglycan-synthesizing enzymes was localised. The role of the cytoskeleton in shape generation and maintenance is important.


Discovery and naming

The genus _Bacillus_ was named in 1835 by Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg, to contain rod-shaped (bacillus) bacteria. He had seven years earlier named the genus _Bacterium_. _Bacillus_ was later amended by Ferdinand Cohn to further describe them as spore-forming, Gram-positive, aerobic or facultatively anaerobic bacteria.[7] Like other genera associated with the early history of microbiology, such as _Pseudomonas_ and _Vibrio_, the 266 species of _Bacillus_ are ubiquitous.[8] The genus has a very large ribosomal 16S diversity.


Isolation and identification

An easy way to isolate _Bacillus_ species is by placing nonsterile soil in a test tube with water, shaking, placing in melted mannitol salt agar, and incubating at room temperature for at least a day. Cultured colonies are usually large, spreading, and irregularly shaped.

Under the microscope, the _Bacillus_ cells appear as rods, and a substantial portion of the cells usually contain oval endospores at one end, making them bulge.


Phylogeny

Three proposals have been presented as representing the phylogeny of the genus _Bacillus_. The first proposal, presented in 2003, is a _Bacillus_-specific study, with the most diversity covered using 16S and the ITS regions. It divides the genus into 10 groups. This includes the nested genera _Paenibacillus, Brevibacillus, Geobacillus, Marinibacillus_ and _Virgibacillus_.[9]

The second proposal, presented in 2008,[10] constructed a 16S (and 23S if available) tree of all validated species.[11][12] The genus _Bacillus_ contains a very large number of nested taxa and majorly in both 16S and 23S. It is paraphyletic to the Lactobacillales (_Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Listeria_, etc.), due to _Bacillus coahuilensis_ and others.

A third proposal, presented in 2010, was a gene concatenation study, and found results similar to the 2008 proposal, but with a much more limited number of species in terms of groups.[13] (This scheme used _Listeria_ as an outgroup, so in light of the ARB tree, it may be "inside-out").

One clade, formed by _B. anthracis_, _B. cereus_, _B. mycoides_, _B. pseudomycoides_, _B. thuringiensis_, and _B. weihenstephanensis_ under the 2011 classification standards, should be a single species (within 97% 16S identity), but due to medical reasons, they are considered separate species[14] (an issue also present for four species of _Shigella_ and _Escherichia coli_).[15]


Species

-   ''B. acidiceler
-   ''B. acidicola
-   ''B. acidiproducens
-   ''B. acidocaldarius
-   ''B. acidoterrestris
-   ''B. aeolius
-   ''B. aerius
-   ''B. aerophilus
-   ''B. agaradhaerens
-   ''B. agri
-   ''B. aidingensis
-   ''B. akibai
-   ''B. alcalophilus
-   ''B. algicola
-   ''B. alginolyticus
-   ''B. alkalidiazotrophicus
-   ''B. alkalinitrilicus
-   ''B. alkalisediminis
-   ''B. alkalitelluris
-   ''B. altitudinis
-   ''B. alveayuensis
-   ''B. alvei
-   ''B. amyloliquefaciens
    -   ''B. a. _subsp._ amyloliquefaciens''
    -   ''B. a. _subsp._ plantarum''
-   ''B. aminovorans[16]
-   ''B. amylolyticus
-   ''B. andreesenii
-   ''B. aneurinilyticus
-   ''B. anthracis
-   ''B. aquimaris
-   ''B. arenosi
-   ''B. arseniciselenatis
-   ''B. arsenicus
-   ''B. aurantiacus
-   ''B. arvi
-   ''B. aryabhattai
-   ''B. asahii
-   ''B. atrophaeus
-   ''B. axarquiensis
-   ''B. azotofixans
-   ''B. azotoformans
-   ''B. badius
-   ''B. barbaricus
-   ''B. bataviensis
-   ''B. beijingensis
-   ''B. benzoevorans
-   ''B. beringensis
-   ''B. berkeleyi
-   ''B. beveridgei
-   ''B. bogoriensis
-   ''B. boroniphilus
-   ''B. borstelensis
-   ''B. brevis Migula
-   ''B. butanolivorans
-   ''B. canaveralius
-   ''B. carboniphilus
-   ''B. cecembensis
-   ''B. cellulosilyticus
-   ''B. centrosporus
-   ''B. cereus
-   ''B. chagannorensis
-   ''B. chitinolyticus
-   ''B. chondroitinus
-   ''B. choshinensis
-   ''B. chungangensis
-   ''B. cibi
-   ''B. circulans
-   ''B. clarkii
-   ''B. clausii
-   ''B. coagulans
-   ''B. coahuilensis
-   ''B. cohnii
-   ''B. composti
-   ''B. curdlanolyticus
-   ''B. cycloheptanicus
-   ''B. cytotoxicus
-   ''B. daliensis
-   ''B. decisifrondis
-   ''B. decolorationis
-   ''B. deserti
-   ''B. dipsosauri
-   ''B. drentensis
-   ''B. edaphicus
-   ''B. ehimensis
-   ''B. eiseniae
-   ''B. enclensis
-   ''B. endophyticus
-   ''B. endoradicis
-   ''B. farraginis
-   ''B. fastidiosus
-   ''B. fengqiuensis
-   ''B. firmus
-   ''B. flexus
-   ''B. foraminis
-   ''B. fordii
-   ''B. formosus
-   ''B. fortis
-   ''B. fumarioli
-   ''B. funiculus
-   ''B. fusiformis
-   ''B. galactophilus
-   ''B. galactosidilyticus
-   ''B. galliciensis
-   ''B. gelatini
-   ''B. gibsonii
-   ''B. ginsengi
-   ''B. ginsengihumi
-   ''B. ginsengisoli
-   ''B. glucanolyticus
-   ''B. gordonae
-   ''B. gottheilii
-   ''B. graminis
-   ''B. halmapalus
-   ''B. haloalkaliphilus
-   ''B. halochares
-   ''B. halodenitrificans
-   ''B. halodurans
-   ''B. halophilus
-   ''B. halosaccharovorans
-   ''B. hemicellulosilyticus
-   ''B. hemicentroti
-   ''B. herbersteinensis
-   ''B. horikoshii
-   ''B. horneckiae
-   ''B. horti
-   ''B. huizhouensis
-   ''B. humi
-   ''B. hwajinpoensis
-   ''B. idriensis
-   ''B. indicus
-   ''B. infantis
-   ''B. infernus
-   ''B. insolitus
-   ''B. invictae
-   ''B. iranensis
-   ''B. isabeliae
-   ''B. isronensis
-   ''B. jeotgali
-   ''B. kaustophilus
-   ''B. kobensis
-   ''B. kochii
-   ''B. kokeshiiformis
-   ''B. koreensis
-   ''B. korlensis
-   ''B. kribbensis
-   ''B. krulwichiae
-   ''B. laevolacticus
-   ''B. larvae
-   ''B. laterosporus
-   ''B. lautus
-   ''B. lehensis
-   ''B. lentimorbus
-   ''B. lentus
-   ''B. licheniformis
-   ''B. ligniniphilus
-   ''B. litoralis
-   ''B. locisalis
-   ''B. luciferensis
-   ''B. luteolus
-   ''B. luteus
-   ''B. macauensis
-   ''B. macerans
-   ''B. macquariensis
-   ''B. macyae
-   ''B. malacitensis
-   ''B. mannanilyticus
-   ''B. marisflavi
-   ''B. marismortui
-   ''B. marmarensis
-   ''B. massiliensis
-   ''B. megaterium
-   ''B. mesonae
-   ''B. methanolicus
-   ''B. methylotrophicus
-   ''B. migulanus
-   ''B. mojavensis
-   ''B. mucilaginosus
-   ''B. muralis
-   ''B. murimartini
-   ''B. mycoides
-   ''B. naganoensis
-   ''B. nanhaiensis
-   ''B. nanhaiisediminis
-   ''B. nealsonii
-   ''B. neidei
-   ''B. neizhouensis
-   ''B. niabensis
-   ''B. niacini
-   ''B. novalis
-   ''B. oceanisediminis
-   ''B. odysseyi
-   ''B. okhensis
-   ''B. okuhidensis
-   ''B. oleronius
-   ''B. oryzaecorticis
-   ''B. oshimensis
-   ''B. pabuli
-   ''B. pakistanensis
-   ''B. pallidus
-   ''B. pallidus
-   ''B. panacisoli
-   ''B. panaciterrae
-   ''B. pantothenticus
-   ''B. parabrevis
-   ''B. paraflexus
-   ''B. pasteurii
-   ''B. patagoniensis
-   ''B. peoriae
-   ''B. persepolensis
-   ''B. persicus
-   ''B. pervagus
-   ''B. plakortidis
-   ''B. pocheonensis
-   ''B. polygoni
-   ''B. polymyxa
-   ''B. popilliae
-   ''B. pseudalcalophilus
-   ''B. pseudofirmus
-   ''B. pseudomycoides
-   ''B. psychrodurans
-   ''B. psychrophilus
-   ''B. psychrosaccharolyticus
-   ''B. psychrotolerans
-   ''B. pulvifaciens
-   ''B. pumilus
-   ''B. purgationiresistens
-   ''B. pycnus
-   ''B. qingdaonensis
-   ''B. qingshengii
-   ''B. reuszeri
-   ''B. rhizosphaerae
-   ''B. rigui
-   ''B. ruris
-   ''B. safensis
-   ''B. salarius
-   ''B. salexigens
-   ''B. saliphilus
-   ''B. schlegelii
-   ''B. sediminis
-   ''B. selenatarsenatis
-   ''B. selenitireducens
-   ''B. seohaeanensis
-   ''B. shacheensis
-   ''B. shackletonii
-   ''B. siamensis
-   ''B. silvestris
-   ''B. simplex
-   ''B. siralis
-   ''B. smithii
-   ''B. soli
-   ''B. solimangrovi
-   ''B. solisalsi
-   ''B. songklensis
-   ''B. sonorensis
-   ''B. sphaericus
-   ''B. sporothermodurans
-   ''B. stearothermophilus
-   ''B. stratosphericus
-   ''B. subterraneus
-   ''B. subtilis
    -   ''B. s. _subsp._ inaquosorum''
    -   ''B. s. _subsp._ spizizenii''
    -   ''B. s. _subsp._ subtilis''
-   ''B. taeanensis
-   ''B. tequilensis
-   ''B. thermantarcticus
-   ''B. thermoaerophilus
-   ''B. thermoamylovorans
-   ''B. thermocatenulatus
-   ''B. thermocloacae
-   ''B. thermocopriae
-   ''B. thermodenitrificans
-   ''B. thermoglucosidasius
-   ''B. thermolactis
-   ''B. thermoleovorans
-   ''B. thermophilus
-   ''B. thermoruber
-   ''B. thermosphaericus
-   ''B. thiaminolyticus
-   ''B. thioparans
-   ''B. thuringiensis
-   ''B. tianshenii
-   ''B. trypoxylicola
-   ''B. tusciae
-   ''B. validus
-   ''B. vallismortis
-   ''B. vedderi
-   ''B. velezensis
-   ''B. vietnamensis
-   ''B. vireti
-   ''B. vulcani
-   ''B. wakoensis
-   ''B. xiamenensis
-   ''B. xiaoxiensis
-   ''B. zhanjiangensis


Ecological significance

_Bacillus_ species are ubiquitous in nature, e.g. in soil. They can occur in extreme environments such as high pH (_B. alcalophilus_), high temperature (_B. thermophilus_), and high salt concentrations (_B. halodurans_). _B. thuringiensis_ produces a toxin that can kill insects and thus has been used as insecticide.[17] _B. siamensis_ has antimicrobial compounds that inhibit plant pathogens, such as the fungi _Rhizoctonia solani_ and _Botrytis cinerea_, and they promote plant growth by volatile emissions.[18] Some species of _Bacillus_ are naturally competent for DNA uptake by transformation.[19]


Clinical significance

-   Two _Bacillus_ species are medically significant: _B. anthracis_, which causes anthrax; and _B. cereus_, which causes food poisoning, with symptoms similar to that caused by _Staphylococcus_.[20]
-   _B. thuringiensis_ is an important insect pathogen, and is sometimes used to control insect pests.
-   _B. subtilis_ is an important model organism. It is also a notable food spoiler, causing ropiness in bread and related food.
-   Some environmental and commercial strains of _B. coagulans_ may play a role in food spoilage of highly acidic, tomato-based products.


Industrial significance

Many _Bacillus_ species are able to secrete large quantities of enzymes. _Bacillus amyloliquefaciens_ is the source of a natural antibiotic protein barnase (a ribonuclease), alpha amylase used in starch hydrolysis, the protease subtilisin used with detergents, and the BamH1 restriction enzyme used in DNA research.

A portion of the _Bacillus thuringiensis_ genome was incorporated into corn (and cotton) crops. The resulting GMOs are resistant to some insect pests.


Use as model organism

Bacillus_subtilis_colonies.jpg'' on an agar plate.]] _Bacillus subtilis_ is one of the best understood prokaryotes, in terms of molecular and cellular biology. Its superb genetic amenability and relatively large size have provided the powerful tools required to investigate a bacterium from all possible aspects. Recent improvements in fluorescent microscopy techniques have provided novel insight into the dynamic structure of a single cell organism. Research on _B. subtilis_ has been at the forefront of bacterial molecular biology and cytology, and the organism is a model for differentiation, gene/protein regulation, and cell cycle events in bacteria.[21]


See also

-   _Paenibacillus_ and _Virgibacillus_, genera of bacteria formerly included in _Bacillus_.[22][23]


References


External links

-   Bacillus genomes and related information at PATRIC, a Bioinformatics Resource Center funded by NIAID

Category:Bacteria genera Bacillus Category:Gram-positive bacteria

[1]

[2] https://www.airspacemag.com/daily-planet/turn-heat-bacterial-spores-can-take-temperatures-hundreds-degrees-180970425/

[3] "Bacterial Endospores". Cornell University College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Department of Microbiology. Retrieved October 21, 2018.

[4]

[5] https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-018-1306-5

[6] https://doi.org/10.1002/rcm.7705

[7]  Cohn F.: _Untersuchungen über Bakterien. Beitrage zur Biologie der Pflanzen_ Heft 2, 1872, 1, 127-224.

[8]

[9]

[10] http://www.arb-silva.de/fileadmin/silva_databases/living_tree/LTP_release_104/LTPs104_SSU_tree.pdf

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14] Ole Andreas Økstad and Anne-Brit Kolstø Chapter 2: "Genomics of Bacillus Species" in M. Wiedmann, W. Zhang (eds.), _Genomics of Foodborne Bacterial Pathogens_, 29 Food Microbiology and Food Safety. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011 DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7686-4_2

[15] Brenner (D.J.): Family I. Enterobacteriaceae Rahn 1937, Nom. fam. cons. Opin. 15, Jud. Com. 1958, 73; Ewing, Farmer, and Brenner 1980, 674; Judicial Commission 1981, 104. In: N.R. Krieg and J.G. Holt (eds), _Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology_, first edition, vol. 1, The Williams & Wilkins Co, Baltimore, 1984, pp. 408-420

[16]

[17] Joan L. Slonczewski & John W. Foster (2011), _Microbiology: An Evolving Science_ (2nd Edition), Norton

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]