In mathematics, more specifically in abstract algebra, the COMMUTATOR SUBGROUP or DERIVED SUBGROUP of a group is the subgroup generated by all the commutators of the group.[1][2]

The commutator subgroup is important because it is the smallest normal subgroup such that the quotient group of the original group by this subgroup is abelian. In other words, _G_/_N_ is abelian if and only if _N_ contains the commutator subgroup of _G_. So in some sense it provides a measure of how far the group is from being abelian; the larger the commutator subgroup is, the "less abelian" the group is.


Commutators

For elements _g_ and _h_ of a group _G_, the commutator of _g_ and _h_ is [g, h] = g^( − 1)h^( − 1)gh. The commutator [g, h] is equal to the identity element _e_ if and only if gh = hg , that is, if and only if _g_ and _h_ commute. In general, gh = hg[g, h].

However, the notation is somewhat arbitrary and there is a non-equivalent variant definition for the commutator that has the inverses on the right hand side of the equation: [g, h] = ghg^( − 1)h^( − 1) in which case gh ≠ hg[g, h] but instead gh = [g, h]hg.

An element of _G_ which is of the form [g, h] for some _g_ and _h_ is called a commutator. The identity element _e_ = [_e_,_e_] is always a commutator, and it is the only commutator if and only if _G_ is abelian.

Here are some simple but useful commutator identities, true for any elements _s_, _g_, _h_ of a group _G_:

-   [g, h]^( − 1) = [h, g].
-   [g, h]^(s) = [g^(s), h^(s)], where g^(s) = s^( − 1)gs (or, respectively, g^(s) = sgs^( − 1)), the conjugate of g by s.
-   For any homomorphism f : G → H, f([g, h]) = [f(g), f(h)].

The first and second identities imply that the set of commutators in _G_ is closed under inversion and conjugation. If in the third identity we take _H_ = _G_, we get that the set of commutators is stable under any endomorphism of _G_. This is in fact a generalization of the second identity, since we can take _f_ to be the conjugation automorphism on _G_, x ↦ x^(s), to get the second identity.

However, the product of two or more commutators need not be a commutator. A generic example is [_a_,_b_][_c_,_d_] in the free group on _a_,_b_,_c_,_d_. It is known that the least order of a finite group for which there exists two commutators whose product is not a commutator is 96; in fact there are two nonisomorphic groups of order 96 with this property.[3]


Definition

This motivates the definition of the COMMUTATOR SUBGROUP [G, G] (also called the DERIVED SUBGROUP, and denoted G′ or G⁽¹⁾) of _G_: it is the subgroup generated by all the commutators.

It follows from the properties of commutators that any element of [G, G] is of the form

[_g_₁, _h_₁]⋯[_g__(_n_), _h__(_n_)]

for some natural number n, where the _g__(_i_) and _h__(_i_) are elements of _G_. Moreover, since ([g₁, h₁]⋯[g_(n), h_(n)])^(s) = [g₁^(s), h₁^(s)]⋯[g_(n)^(s), h_(n)^(s)], the commutator subgroup is normal in _G_. For any homomorphism _f_: _G_ → _H_,

_f_([_g_₁, _h_₁]⋯[_g__(_n_), _h__(_n_)]) = [_f_(_g_₁), _f_(_h_₁)]⋯[_f_(_g__(_n_)), _f_(_h__(_n_))]
,

so that f([G, G]) ≤ [H, H].

This shows that the commutator subgroup can be viewed as a functor on the category of groups, some implications of which are explored below. Moreover, taking _G_ = _H_ it shows that the commutator subgroup is stable under every endomorphism of _G_: that is, [_G_,_G_] is a fully characteristic subgroup of _G_, a property which is considerably stronger than normality.

The commutator subgroup can also be defined as the set of elements _g_ of the group which have an expression as a product _g_ = _g_₁ _g_₂ ... _g_(k)_ that can be rearranged to give the identity.

Derived series

This construction can be iterated:

_G_⁽⁰⁾ := _G_

_G_^((_n_)) := [_G_^((_n_ − 1)), _G_^((_n_ − 1))] _n_ ∈ N
The groups G⁽²⁾, G⁽³⁾, … are called the SECOND DERIVED SUBGROUP, THIRD DERIVED SUBGROUP, and so forth, and the descending normal series

⋯ ⊲ _G_⁽²⁾ ⊲ _G_⁽¹⁾ ⊲ _G_⁽⁰⁾ = _G_
is called the DERIVED SERIES. This should not be confused with the LOWER CENTRAL SERIES, whose terms are G_(n) := [G_(n − 1), G].

For a finite group, the derived series terminates in a perfect group, which may or may not be trivial. For an infinite group, the derived series need not terminate at a finite stage, and one can continue it to infinite ordinal numbers via transfinite recursion, thereby obtaining the TRANSFINITE DERIVED SERIES, which eventually terminates at the perfect core of the group.

Abelianization

Given a group G, a quotient group G/N is abelian if and only if [G, G] ≤ N.

The quotient G/[G, G] is an abelian group called the ABELIANIZATION of G or G MADE ABELIAN.[4] It is usually denoted by G^(ab) or G_(ab).

There is a useful categorical interpretation of the map φ : G → G^(ab). Namely φ is universal for homomorphisms from G to an abelian group H: for any abelian group H and homomorphism of groups f : G → H there exists a unique homomorphism F : G^(ab) → H such that f = F ∘ φ. As usual for objects defined by universal mapping properties, this shows the uniqueness of the abelianization _G_^(ab) up to canonical isomorphism, whereas the explicit construction G → G/[G, G] shows existence.

The abelianization functor is the left adjoint of the inclusion functor from the category of abelian groups to the category of groups. The existence of the abelianization functor GRP → AB makes the category Ab a reflective subcategory of the category of groups, defined as a full subcategory whose inclusion functor has a left adjoint.

Another important interpretation of G^(ab) is as H₁(G, ℤ), the first homology group of G with integral coefficients.

Classes of groups

A group _G_ is an ABELIAN GROUP if and only if the derived group is trivial: [_G_,_G_] = {_e_}. Equivalently, if and only if the group equals its abelianization. See above for the definition of a group's abelianization.

A group _G_ is a PERFECT GROUP if and only if the derived group equals the group itself: [_G_,_G_] = _G_. Equivalently, if and only if the abelianization of the group is trivial. This is "opposite" to abelian.

A group with G^((n)) = {e} for some _n_ in N is called a SOLVABLE GROUP; this is weaker than abelian, which is the case _n_ = 1.

A group with G^((n)) ≠ {e} for all _n_ in N is called a NON-SOLVABLE GROUP.

A group with G^((α)) = {e} for some ordinal number, possibly infinite, is called a HYPOABELIAN GROUP; this is weaker than solvable, which is the case α is finite (a natural number).


Examples

-   The commutator subgroup of any abelian group is trivial.
-   The commutator subgroup of the general linear group GL_(n)(k) over a field or a division ring _k_ equals the special linear group SL_(n)(k) provided that n ≠ 2 or _k_ is not the field with two elements.[5]
-   The commutator subgroup of the alternating group _A_₄ is the Klein four group.
-   The commutator subgroup of the symmetric group _S_(n)_ is the alternating group _A_(n)_.
-   The commutator subgroup of the quaternion group _Q_ = {1, −1, _i_, −_i_, _j_, −_j_, _k_, −_k_} is [_Q_,_Q_]={1, −1}.
-   The commutator subgroup of the fundamental group π₁(_X_) of a path-connected topological space _X_ is the kernel of the natural homomorphism onto the first singular homology group _H_₁(_X_).

Map from Out

Since the derived subgroup is characteristic, any automorphism of _G_ induces an automorphism of the abelianization. Since the abelianization is abelian, inner automorphisms act trivially, hence this yields a map

Out(_G_) → Aut(_G_^(ab))


See also

-   Solvable group
-   Nilpotent group
-   The abelianization _H_/_H_' of a subgroup _H_ < _G_ of finite index (_G_:_H_) is the target of the Artin transfer _T_(_G_,_H_).


Notes


References

-   {{ citation | last1 = Dummit | first1 = David S. | last2 = Foote | first2 = Richard M. | title = Abstract Algebra | publisher = John Wiley & Sons | year = 2004 | edition = 3rd | isbn = 0-471-43334-9 }}
-   {{ citation | first1 = John B. | last1 = Fraleigh | year = 1976 | isbn = 0-201-01984-1 | title = A First Course In Abstract Algebra | edition = 2nd | publisher = Addison-Wesley | location = Reading }}
-   -   {{ cite web | url = http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/7811/derived-subgroups-and-commutators | first = Mariano | last = Suárez-Alvarez | title = Derived Subgroups and Commutators |ref=harv}}


External links

-

Category:Group theory Category:Functional subgroups Category:Articles containing proofs

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] , Theorem II.9.4