_D'ACADEMY_ or DA (stands for Dangdut Academy) is the first and biggest dangdut music talent show created by Programming Indosiar. Production is conducted by Indosiar Production Team (November 2015 - March 2016) and Indonesia Entertainmen Produksi (April 2016 - December 2017). This event has successfully risen up dangdut music phenomenon, and this program has become one of most successful talent search show in Indonesia. The success of this event is resulted with the program D 'Academy Celebrity and D' Academy Asia.

All participants who have passed the selection in the audition process will have training session in the form of choreography, vocal, performance, personality training and fashion advice from some experts in their respective fields, such as Hamdan ATT, Nassar, Uncle Jo, Adibal Sahrul, Dedi Puja, and Mislam. Participants who have passed the selection every week will be pitted in the rounds that have been determined until grand final night. The performance of the participants will be judged by the judges such as Iis Dahlia, Inul Daratista, Rita Sugiarto, also judged by the viewers and fans via SMS votes. In each episode, participants with the lowest SMS vote amount will be tersenggol (the term used by D 'Academy for elimination system). The winner of this talent search gets a cash prize of 150 million rupiahs and a car, for the third season the amount of cash is 250 million rupiahs. In addition, the winner is also entitled to a management contract as well as a recording opportunity to launch a single or an album.

The hosts are Ramzi, Irfan Hakim, Rina Nose, Andhika Pratama, and Gilang Dirga. The program starts premiering on Monday, February 3, 2014 for its first season, its second season on February 8, 2015, January 24, 2016 for its third season, and 22 January 2017 for its fourth season. D'Academy managed to be nominated in Panasonic Gobel Awards 2015 & Panasonic Gobel Awards 2016 for Best Talent Search & Reality Show category. In addition, D 'Academy also managed to be nominated in Indonesian Television Awards program award for the category of Most Popular Prime-Time Non Drama Program. There have been three winners of the show to date: Lesti Andryani, Evi Anggraini, and Muhammad Irsyad Basir.


External links

-

Category:Indonesian reality television series Category:Talent shows Category:2014 Indonesian television series debuts Category:Indosiar shows