The Delta State Polytechnic Ogwashi-Uku is one of the three polytechnics in Delta State, Nigeria, Located in Ogwashi-Uku Delta State, Nigeria. The Polytechnic offer National Diplomas and Higher National Diplomas in Art and Design (Fashion Design and Clothing Technology, and General Art), Business (Accountancy, Business Administration,Human Resource Management, Marketing, Mass Communication, Office Technology Management and Production Operations Management), Engineering (Agriculture and Bio-environmental Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Foundry Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Metallurgical Engineering and Welding and Fabrication) and Applied Sciences (Computer Science, Mathematics and Statistics and Hospitality and Tourism Management).[1]


History[2]

The Delta State Polytechnic was established by the Delta State Polytechnic Ogwashi-Uku Law, 2002. The Polytechnic officially opened on Thursday January 23 when the second Executive governor of Delta State Chief James Onanefe Ibori formally inaugurated the school. The establishment of a new polytechnic at Ogwashi-Uku was not without challenges. Before this time, there had been cries by the indigenes of the community for the reopening of Ogwashi-Uku polytechnic which had earlier been closed in 1986 by the then Military Administrator Lt. Colonel Jerry Useni, four years after its establishment. The closure was seen as manifestly unfair as the Edo State University (now AAU) which was established at the same time as Ogwashi-Uku Polytechnic was not affected. The work done by Hon. Michael Okonjo, who was then the Chairman, the House committee on Education and that of his brother Late, Dr. Isaac Okonjo who was the Secretary to the Bendel State government in ensuring the establishment of the Ogwashi-Uku polytechnic had been undone by a military Decree. Unhappy with this development, the people continued to fight for the reopening of the polytechnic. With the enthronement of democracy, the fight gathered momentum. On the forefront of the fight to reopen the Polytechnic were his royal highness, Professor Chukwuka Benjamin Okonjo, the Obi of Ogwashi-Uku, Chief Oba Ilechie and other stake holders like Hon. Pascal Nwaorah, late Kisito Ilechie and many others.

In early 2002, the State Government in response to the yearning of the people decided to establish a new polytechnic. However to ensure equity, the Delta State Polytechnic Oghara and Delta State Polytechnic Ozoro were also established. The Delta State Polytechnic, Ogwashi-Uku begun academic activities in 2003 with a modest population of about 200 students, in three departments namely: Accountancy, Mechanical Engineering and Fashion & Clothing Technology under the first rector of the Polytechnic, now Prof. J.E. O. Ovri. The Polytechnic at this time operated out of the former Delta Preparatory Primary School premises along Isah Road, Ogwashi-Uku with the Motto: Creativity for Development until 2004 when it moved to the former party secretariat (now Campus B which currently houses department of Fashion & Clothing Technology) along Ogwashi- Uku/Azagba road. In early 2005, the Polytechnic Rectory was moved to the Polytechnic Guest House at Kwale Junction. With the donation of a large piece of land measuring 2 km by 1 km by the host community and subsequently designated as the main campus(permanent site), the polytechnic moved the department of mechanical engineering to the main campus. By 2007, relocation of the Rectory, the Registry and other major department to the main campus had been completed. Since the establishment of the school, three substantive Rectors have been appointed. They include:

· Dr. J.E.O. Ovri: November 2002 – November 2006

· Professor A.O. Egwunyenga: August 2007 – August 2011

· Dr. (Mrs.) E.N. Mogekwu: March 2012 to date

· During any interregnum, deputy rectors functioned as Acting Rectors. Those who served in acting capacity include:

· Mr. J.U. Akajagbor: Nov 2006 – August 2007

· Mr. S.E. Oseafiana: Aug 2011 – March 2012

· Mr Edafe John Atajeromavwo 2016-date

Substantive Rectors[3]

PROFESSOR JAMES OVRI-2003-2007 (PIONEERING DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS)

Prof. J.E.O. Ovri was the pioneer rector: he faced the herculean task of laying the infrastructural and academic foundation of the Delta State Polytechnic Ogwashi-Uku. Despite the challenges of the task, he not only ensured the physical expansion of the institution, but also midwifed the establishment and accreditation of new programmes in the polytechnic. Under his administration, the polytechnic moved the institution from the rented former D.P.P.S building to what is now known as Campus B, Campus C and the Permanent site. The relocation of the school is a testament of the rector’s vision, and proactiveness. Aside these, it involved considerable repairs and refurnishing of the old buildings that had been abandoned for decades. Again new buildings which now constitute part of Office Technology Management (OTM) and Hospitality and Tourism Management (HTM) were constructed. In the academic sphere, Prof. Ovri ensured that the institution maintained very high standard. Under his stewardship, the polytechnic successfully expanded its NBTE approved programmes from the initial three to six. The programmes were not only approved but listed in the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB). The programmes include Accountancy (code-59972A), Business Administration (code-59975k), Fashion Design and Clothing Technology (5996G), Catering and Hotel Management (code-59977C), Mechanical Engineering (code-59978J) and Welding and Fabrication (code-59979F).

Mr AkajagborJ.U assumed duties as acting Rector at the expiration of Prof. Ovri’s tenure. As acting Rector, Mr Akajagbor consolidated on the programmes and vision of his boss. It is on record, that Mr Akajagbor oversaw the relocation of the rectory to the permanent site. More importantly, Mr Akajagbor continued with the expansion of academic programmes of the polytechnic by successfully piloting the successful accreditation of Mass Communication and Fine Art.

PROFESSOR ANDY EGWUNYENGA(2007–2011)

The appointment of Prof. Andy Egwunyenga in August 2007 as Rector of Delta State Polytechnic, Ogwashi-Uku began a new era in the annals of the institution. Like his predecessor, Prof Egwunyenga recognised the need to develop the polytechnic’s academic, and infrastructure.

In the academic front, the polytechnic organized training seminars for staff. More importantly, Professor Egwunyenga expanded the programmes available in the Polytechnic by successfully securing accreditation for HND programmes in Accountancy, Fashion Design and Clothing Technology, Hospitality and Tourism Management, and ND in Computer Science as well as Maths and Statistics. Furthermore, accreditation visitations were made for the following programmes: National Diploma Programmes in Science Laboratory Technology: Tourism: Textile Technology and Insurance. The Higher National Diploma Programmes (HND): Business Administration: Mass Communication: Sculpture, Graphics and Painting. The Polytechnic also created a school of part time studies not just to boost internally generated revenue but to afford aspiring student the opportunity of acquiring polytechnic education.

In an attempt to secure the institution, Prof Egwunyenga constructed a fence from one end of the institution to the other with the school gate properly tucked at the middle. An upgrade and re-equipping of certain departments like department of hotel and tourism management, department of welding and fabrication, and the school library to NBTE standards was carried out. Besides, the polytechnic under the management of Prof Egwunyenga commenced the construction of Lecture Hall complex a building made up of four large classrooms and about 18 offices. The Polytechnic was also a beneficiary of AGIP and TETFUND infrastructural projects, like the ICT building, the AGIP halls among others. Part of the institution was also landscaped. In furtherance of the Polytechnic goal of educating its graduate in job creation, Prof. Egwunyenga successfully initiated the establishment of Student’s Resource and Entrepreneurial Development Centre. Mr Oseafiana as deputy rector began to function as the Acting Rector. As acting Rector, Mr Steve Oseafiana consolidated the gains under Professor Egwunyenga.

DR. MRS. EDNA NNEKAMOGEKWU (PERSONAL PROFILE)

Dr Mrs Edna Mogekwu hails from Ogwashi-Uku in Aniocha South local government area of Delta State. She started her primary school at Government School Agbor and finished at Nnabuwa Primary School, Ogwashi-Uku. She thereafter wrote her Cambridge at Our Lady of Apostles (Maryway), Ibadan and her Higher School Certificate Examination at Ibadan Grammar School.

She proceeded to Boston University in the U.S. on a Federal Government Scholarship to study in Business Administration. After her first degree, she enrolled for a Master degree in Public Management at the prestigious University of Massachusetts. In 1982, she returned to Nigeria to participate in the National Youth Service Corp. Soon after her one year service at the International Beer and Beverages Industries (IBBI) Ltd she was joined the services of Kaduna Polytechnic as a Lecturer. At Kaduna Polytechnic She was appointed Head of Department of Business Studies. As Head of Department, she led her Department to develop the HND Curriculum in Human Resource Management (HRM) and Production Operations Management. Thus Kaduna Polytechnic became the first Polytechnic to introduce and run these Programmes nationally through the NBTE. She was appointed Dean School of business. When her term expired, she was appointed Academic Director where she managed a student population of 25,000 and staff strength of 700 (Academic and Non Academic) from 2003 to 2008. During her tenure as the Academic Director of the College, she not only managed sixteen (16) Departments effectively but ensured the introduction and accreditation of several new programmes.

In 2008, she was obtained a doctorate degree in Management from University of Nigeria. Dr Mogekwu and is a Fellow of the Institute of Management Consultants, Corporate Administrators of Nigeria, a full member of NIM and many other Professional bodies. She has served as a member of various Governing Councils in State, Federal and Professional Agencies.


Programmes Development[4]

In line with its vision of providing conducive learning environment and academic development, management has expanded the Polytechnic’s academic programmes. Within the period under review, the following academic programmes have been put up for resource inspection, accreditation and re-accreditation:

DEPARTMENT OF BANKING AND FINANCE

The department of Banking and Finance was granted interim accreditation by a letter from the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) in a letter dated 29 July 2015. By this approval, the department was authorized to run two streams of National Diploma (ND) programme in Banking and Finance with effects from the 2015/2016 academic session.

DEPARTMENT OF MARKETING

Marketing evolved from its early origin in distribution and selling into a comprehensive philosophy for relating an organization to its markets. The National Diploma (ND) Degree in Marketing programme commenced in August, 2015 following a successful resource inspection by the National Board for Technical Education(NBTE) team. The programme is for two years in which at the end students are to be awarded ND Degree Certificates. The Head of Department is by Mrs. Omodafe Grace

DEPARTMENT OF FOUNDRY ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY

The Department was set up in 2013 after due resource inspection in 2012 by NBTE and formal approval given for the mounting of ND Foundry Engineering Technology Programme by NBTE. The Department has also been given approval by NBTE to run the HND Foundry Engineering Technology Programme starting from the 2015/2016 Academic Session. Foundry Engineering Department currently has a student population of about 50 and a crop of experienced and resourceful staff. The Department is headed by Engr. S. Oboli. Foundry Engineering Technology Department can generate money for the polytechnic in the areas of spare parts production, metallic gift items production, local agricultural tools production and production of accessories for the construction industries. The Department can run Consultancy Services in design and construction of molds for parts production: industrial heat treatment and materials analysis when fully established. The mission of the Department is to produce Technicians and Technologists who can function as Production Supervisors and Technologists especially in the Metals, Plastic Industries and Ceramics Industries; design and produce patterns and molds for the production of castings; construct and operate simple furnaces for melting of metals.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL AND BIO-ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY,

The Department of Agricultural and Bio-Environmental Engineering was accredited as part of the existing School of Engineering of the Delta State Polytechnic, Ogwashi-Uku, by the National Board for Technical Education in 2015. The Department took off fully with 46 students admitted into the National Diploma programme in October, 2015. The Department is staffed with seasoned and competent academic and non- academic staff whose specialties include soil and water engineering, soil science, processing and storage engineering as well as farm power and machinery. The Acting Head of Department is Engr. P.C.N Okonkwo

The graduates of the Department are being trained specifically for job opportunities in Job opportunities and consultancy services in the areas outlined below: design, production and maintenance of machinery; agricultural production, processing and storage; oil and gas; construction of roads, bridges and residential buildings; irrigation and drainage; Education and water supply and waste management as well as research and consultancy.

CIVIL ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT

Civil Engineering Department was established in March 2015. The Department was given initial accreditation in September, 2015 by the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE). The Department currently has a staff Strength of 14, made up of eight academic staff and six non academic staff. The number of students currently enrolled in the Department stands at 54. The Department currently offers courses leading to the award of National Diploma ND in Civil Engineering. This will be expanded to include the award of HND in Civil Engineering. The Department, if well positioned, is capable of generating a lot of money for the Polytechnic. The construction companies can come to test their concrete cubes with our testing machine, they usually pay for such testing. The Department can also run Consultancy Services in the following areas: design, supervision of construction of structures; soil testing for foundation construction; training of youths in carpentry and wood work; training of youths in concrete and block laying etc. The mission of the Department is to produce Technicians and Technologist for both the private and public sectors of the economy who can also be self-establishing and self-reliant in the field of Civil Engineering and related fields. The diplomats are expected, on completion of their programme be able to: function as a foreman on a construction site; produce good civil engineering drainage and schedules; supervise civil engineering projects; carry out necessary tests on civil engineering materials; interpret civil engineering drawing; interpret surveyors measurements; set out civil engineering projects and carry out maintenance on civil works.

DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY

The Department of Computer Engineering was created in the School of Engineering in 2013 and currently, it runs a four-semester National Diploma program in Computer Engineering. The Department has a Computer Hardware Laboratory and a Basic Computing Laboratory (Computer Studio) which enables her to function optimally in terms imparting practical knowledge in to the students.

DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONIC ENGINEERING

The Department of Electrical/Electronic Engineering Technology was mounted in 2013 by management sequel to the appropriate resource inspection by the National Board for Technical Education in August 2012. Furthermore, having ran the National Diploma programme in Electrical/Electronic Engineering Technology for two academic sessions: the programme has since been accredited in May,2015. The aim and objective of the Department is to train sound middle level man power with the vision of training World class Technicians and Technologists in the field of electrical/electronic engineering technology. With a population of about a 100 students in the department and an average 50 students per level, it has an academic Staff strength of 22 which consist of lecturers of different cadres including Technologists. The Department has the potentials of providing services in the following areas: design and implementation of industrial and domestic electrical installations: maintenance of industrial and domestic electrical/electrical installations: design and installation of electrical protective systems: design and installation of electrical power systems including rural electrification, including street lights. The Head of Department is Engr. C.M. Chiejine and he holds a Doctorate degree, Master of Science and a Bachelor Degree in Engineering.

DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES

Department of Management studies comprises two Departments, Human Resources Management and Production & Operations Management. The Resource Inspection for the Department was carried out by NBTE between 19TH and 22NDof April 2015. Interim accreditation was granted both departments with effect from 2015/2016 academic session-2 streams of 40 students per stream for both departments. The Departments only run HND programme. The general entry requirement for HND in Human Resources Management include National Diploma in Business Studies/Business Administration, Financial Studies, Social Development, Co-operative Studies, Accountancy, Purchasing & Supply, Local Government Studies, Secretarial Studies , Insurance , Banking & Finance, Marketing and Public Administration at minimum of Lower credit level plus one (1) year post qualification working experience or at least Pass level with at least two years (2 post- qualification working experience. In addition to the above, candidates must have ND entry requirements – which is 5 credits passes including Mathematics and English Language in SSCE/ NABTED/NECO. On completion of the course HND Human Resources Management, diplomates would have been armed with practical and theoretical knowledge on Training & Development ,Organization Development, Organisation and job Design, Human Resources Planning, Selection& Staffing, Personnel Research& information systems, Compensation/benefits, Union Labour relations etc., which will result in Quality work life. The general entry requirement for HND in Production & Operations Management include: National Diploma (ND) in Business Studies /Business Administration, Financial Studies, Banking, Marketing, Catering & Hotel management, Computer Studies, Mechanical Engineering, Industrial Engineering, Statistics, Estate Management, Textile Technology/ Fashion Design or Printing Technology at a minimum of lower Credit Level plus one (1) year post qualification working experience or at least a pass level with at least 2 years post qualification working experience. In addition, candidates must have ND entry requirements. The HND Programme in Production & Operations Management is aimed at producing diplomats with sound theoretical and practical knowledge to effectively carryout a number of activities in production and operation processes of organizations. On completion of the course on HND Production & Operations Management, the diplomats should be able to : Understand the basic principles and techniques of management for ensuring organizational efficiency, effectiveness and accountability; identify operational problems, analyze and develop solution to such problems; undertake efficient and effective application of management concepts and techniques in production and operation processes in industries; effectively plan production and operations activities; Prevent or minimize managerial, production and operational problems in their various organizations; identify specific line, process or functional problems and with precision, find solution to them; appreciate the application of computers in organizational management, project feasibility (preparation) planning and management. The curriculum of the HND programmes consists of four main components viz: general education courses; foundation courses; professional courses and supervised industrial work experience (SIWES). As the Department grows, it is intended that consultancy services will be offered to businesses and this will contribute to the internally generated revenue of the Department and the Polytechnic. Mr.Oseafiana. O. Joseph is the pioneer Head of Department of Management Studies.

Community and Skills Acquisition and Development Centre

ENTREPRENEURSHIP CENTRE


References

Category:Universities and colleges in Nigeria

[1] https://mydspg.edu.ng/schools.php

[2]

[3]

[4]