In particle physics, the ELECTROWEAK INTERACTION is the unified description of two of the four known fundamental interactions of nature: electromagnetism and the weak interaction. Although these two forces appear very different at everyday low energies, the theory models them as two different aspects of the same force. Above the unification energy, on the order of 246 GeV ,[1] they would merge into a single ELECTROWEAK FORCE. Thus, if the universe is hot enough (approximately 10¹⁵ K, a temperature not exceeded since shortly after the Big Bang), then the electromagnetic force and weak force merge into a combined electroweak force. During the quark epoch, the electroweak force split into the electromagnetic and weak force.

Sheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam,[2][3] and Steven Weinberg[4] were awarded the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics for their contributions to the unification of the weak and electromagnetic interaction between elementary particles.[5][6] The existence of the electroweak interactions was experimentally established in two stages, the first being the discovery of neutral currents in neutrino scattering by the Gargamelle collaboration in 1973, and the second in 1983 by the UA1 and the UA2 collaborations that involved the discovery of the W and Z gauge bosons in proton–antiproton collisions at the converted Super Proton Synchrotron. In 1999, Gerardus 't Hooft and Martinus Veltman were awarded the Nobel prize for showing that the electroweak theory is renormalizable.


Formulation

upright=1.25 upright=1.25, _T₃_, and weak hypercharge, _Y_(W)_, of the known elementary particles, showing the electric charge, _Q_, along the weak mixing angle. The neutral Higgs field (circled) breaks the electroweak symmetry and interacts with other particles to give them mass. Three components of the Higgs field become part of the massive _W_ and _Z_ bosons.]]

Mathematically, electromagnetism is unified with the weak interactions in the Weinberg–Salam theory as a Yang–Mills field with an _SU_(2) × _U_(1) gauge group. The corresponding gauge bosons are the THREE W bosons of weak isospin from _SU(2)_ (_W₁, W₂_, and _W₃_), and the _B_ boson of weak hypercharge from _U(1)_, respectively, all of which are massless.

In the Standard Model, the [[W_and_Z_bosons|(W_1\mp i W_2).

The distinction between electromagnetism and the weak force arises because there is a (nontrivial) linear combination of _Y_ and _T_₃ that vanishes for the Higgs boson (it is an eigenstate of both _Y_ and _T_₃, so the coefficients may be taken as −_T_₃ and _Y_): _U_(1)_(em) is defined to be the group generated by this linear combination, and is unbroken because it does not interact with the Higgs.


Lagrangian

Before electroweak symmetry breaking

The Lagrangian for the electroweak interactions is divided into four parts before electroweak symmetry breaking becomes manifest,

ℒ_(EW) = ℒ_(_g_) + ℒ_(_f_) + ℒ_(_h_) + ℒ_(_y_) .

The ℒ_(g) term describes the interaction between the three vector bosons and the vector boson,

$$\mathcal{L}_g = -\tfrac{1}{4} W_{a}^{\mu\nu}W_{\mu\nu}^a - \tfrac{1}{4} B^{\mu\nu}B_{\mu\nu}$$
, where W^(aμν) (a = 1, 2, 3) and B^(μν) are the field strength tensors for the weak isospin and weak hypercharge gauge fields.

ℒ_(f) is the kinetic term for the Standard Model fermions. The interaction of the gauge bosons and the fermions are through the gauge covariant derivative,

$$\mathcal{L}_f =   \overline{Q}_i iD\!\!\!\!/\; Q_i+ \overline{u}_i iD\!\!\!\!/\; u_i+ \overline{d}_i iD\!\!\!\!/\; d_i+ \overline{L}_i iD\!\!\!\!/\; L_i+ \overline{e}_i iD\!\!\!\!/\; e_i$$
, where the subscript runs over the three generations of fermions; , , and are the left-handed doublet, right-handed singlet up, and right handed singlet down quark fields; and and are the left-handed doublet and right-handed singlet electron fields.

The term describes the Higgs field and its interactions with itself and the gauge bosons,

$$\mathcal{L}_h = |D_\mu h|^2 - \lambda \left(|h|^2 - \frac{v^2}{2}\right)^2$$

The term displays the Yukawa interaction with the fermions,

$$\mathcal{L}_y = - y_{u\, ij} \epsilon^{ab} \,h_b^\dagger\, \overline{Q}_{ia} u_j^c - y_{d\, ij}\, h\, \overline{Q}_i d^c_j - y_{e\,ij} \,h\, \overline{L}_i e^c_j + h.c. ~,$$
and generates their masses, manifest when the Higgs field acquires a nonzero vacuum expectation value, discussed next.

After electroweak symmetry breaking

The Lagrangian reorganizes itself as the Higgs boson acquires a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value dictated by the potential of the previous section. As a result of this rewriting, the symmetry breaking becomes manifest.

Due to its complexity, this Lagrangian is best described by breaking it up into several parts as follows.

ℒ_(EW) = ℒ_(K) + ℒ_(N) + ℒ_(C) + ℒ_(H) + ℒ_(HV) + ℒ_(WWV) + ℒ_(WWVV) + ℒ_(Y).

The kinetic term ℒ_(K) contains all the quadratic terms of the Lagrangian, which include the dynamic terms (the partial derivatives) and the mass terms (conspicuously absent from the Lagrangian before symmetry breaking)

$$\begin{align}
\mathcal{L}_\text{K} = \sum_f \overline{f}(i\partial\!\!\!/\!\;-m_f)f-\frac14A_{\mu\nu}A^{\mu\nu}-\frac12W^+_{\mu\nu}W^{-\mu\nu}+m_W^2W^+_\mu W^{-\mu}
\\
\qquad -\frac14Z_{\mu\nu}Z^{\mu\nu}+\frac12m_Z^2Z_\mu Z^\mu+\frac12(\partial^\mu H)(\partial_\mu H)-\frac12m_H^2H^2  ~,
\end{align}$$
where the sum runs over all the fermions of the theory (quarks and leptons), and the fields A_(μν), Z_(μν), W_(μν)^(−), and W_(μν)⁺ ≡ (W_(μν)^(−))^(†) are given as

_X__(_μ__ν_)^(_a_) = ∂_(_μ_)_X__(_ν_)^(_a_) − ∂_(_ν_)_X__(_μ_)^(_a_) + _g__f_^(_a__b__c_)_X__(_μ_)^(_b_)_X__(_ν_)^(_c_) ,
with to be replaced by the relevant field, and by the structure constants of the appropriate gauge group.

The neutral current ℒ_(N) and charged current ℒ_(C) components of the Lagrangian contain the interactions between the fermions and gauge bosons,

$$\mathcal{L}_{\text{N}} = e J_\mu^{\text{em}} A^\mu + \frac g{\cos\theta_W}(J_\mu^3-\sin^2\theta_WJ_\mu^{\text{em}})Z^\mu$$
, where == ; while the electromagnetic current J_(μ)^(em) and the neutral weak current J_(μ)³ are

$$J_\mu^{\text{em}} = \sum_f q_f\overline{f}\gamma_\mu f$$
, and

$$J_\mu^3 = \sum_f I^3_f\overline{f} \gamma_\mu\frac{1-\gamma^5}{2}  f$$
where q_(f) and I_(f)³ are the fermions' electric charges and weak isospin.

The charged current part of the Lagrangian is given by

$$\mathcal{L}_\text{C} = -\frac g{\sqrt2}\left[\overline u_i\gamma^\mu\frac{1-\gamma^5}2M^{\text{CKM}}_{ij}d_j+\overline\nu_i\gamma^\mu\frac{1-\gamma^5}2e_i\right]W_\mu^+ +\text{h.c.} ~,$$
where ℒ_(H) contains the Higgs three-point and four-point self interaction terms,

$$\mathcal{L}_\text{H} = -\frac{gm_H^2}{4m_W}H^3-\frac{g^2m_H^2}{32m_W^2}H^4 ~.$$

ℒ_(HV) contains the Higgs interactions with gauge vector bosons,

$$\mathcal{L}_{\text{HV}}=\left(gm_WH+\frac{g^2}4H^2\right)\left(W_\mu^+W^{-\mu}+\frac1{2\cos^2\theta_W}Z_\mu Z^\mu\right).$$

ℒ_(WWV) contains the gauge three-point self interactions,

ℒ_(WWV) =  − _i__g_[(_W__(_μ__ν_)⁺_W_^( − _μ_) − _W_^( + _μ_)_W__(_μ__ν_)^(−))(_A_^(_ν_)sin _θ__(_W_) − _Z_^(_ν_)cos _θ__(_W_)) + _W__(_ν_)^(−)_W__(_μ_)⁺(_A_^(_μ__ν_)sin _θ__(_W_) − _Z_^(_μ__ν_)cos _θ__(_W_))].

ℒ_(WWVV) contains the gauge four-point self interactions,

$$\begin{align}
\mathcal{L}_{\text{WWVV}} = -\frac{g^2}4 \Big\{&[2W_\mu^+W^{-\mu} + (A_\mu\sin\theta_W - Z_\mu\cos\theta_W)^2]^2
\\
&- [W_\mu^+W_\nu^- + W_\nu^+W_\mu^- + (A_\mu\sin\theta_W - Z_\mu\cos\theta_W) (A_\nu\sin\theta_W - Z_\nu\cos\theta_W)]^2\Big\}.
\end{align}$$

ℒ_(Y) contains the Yukawa interactions between the fermions and the Higgs field,

$$\mathcal{L}_\text{Y} = -\sum_f \frac{gm_f}{2m_W}\overline ffH.$$

Note the $\tfrac{1}{2}(1-\gamma^5)$ factors in the weak couplings: these factors project out the left handed components of the spinor fields. This is why electroweak theory is said to be a chiral theory.


See also

-   Yang-Mills Theory
-   Fundamental forces
-   History of quantum field theory
-   Standard Model (mathematical formulation)
-   Unitarity gauge
-   Weinberg angle


Notes


References


Further reading

General readers

-   Conveys much of the Standard Model with no formal mathematics. Very thorough on the weak interaction.

Texts

-   -   -

Articles

-   -   -   -   -

Category:Particle physics *

[1] The particular number 246 GeV is taken to be the vacuum expectation value $v = (G_F \sqrt{2})^{-1/2}$ of the Higgs field (where G_(F) is the Fermi coupling constant).

[2] Glashow, S. (1959). "The renormalizability of vector meson interactions." _Nucl. Phys._ 10, 107.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]