In mathematics, more specifically in ring theory, a EUCLIDEAN DOMAIN (also called a EUCLIDEAN RING) is an integral domain that can be endowed with a Euclidean function which allows a suitable generalization of the Euclidean division of the integers. This generalized Euclidean algorithm can be put to many of the same uses as Euclid's original algorithm in the ring of integers: in any Euclidean domain, one can apply the Euclidean algorithm to compute the greatest common divisor of any two elements. In particular, the greatest common divisor of any two elements exists and can be written as a linear combination of them (Bézout's identity). Also every ideal in a Euclidean domain is principal, which implies a suitable generalization of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic: every Euclidean domain is a unique factorization domain.

It is important to compare the class of Euclidean domains with the larger class of principal ideal domains (PIDs). An arbitrary PID has much the same "structural properties" of a Euclidean domain (or, indeed, even of the ring of integers), but when an explicit algorithm for Euclidean division is known, one may use Euclidean algorithm and extended Euclidean algorithm to compute greatest common divisors and Bézout's identity. In particular, the existence of efficient algorithms for Euclidean division of integers and of polynomials in one variable over a field is of basic importance in computer algebra.

So, given an integral domain , it is often very useful to know that has a Euclidean function: in particular, this implies that is a PID. However, if there is no "obvious" Euclidean function, then determining whether is a PID is generally a much easier problem than determining whether it is a Euclidean domain.

Euclidean domains appear in the following chain of class inclusions:


Definition

Let be an integral domain. A EUCLIDEAN FUNCTION on is a function from } to the non-negative integers satisfying the following fundamental division-with-remainder property:

-   (EF1) If and are in and is nonzero, then there exists and in such that _bq_ + _r_}} and either or .

A EUCLIDEAN DOMAIN is an integral domain which can be endowed with at least one Euclidean function. It is important to note that a particular Euclidean function is _not_ part of the structure of a Euclidean domain; in general, a Euclidean domain will admit many different Euclidean functions.

Most algebra texts require a Euclidean function to have the following additional property:

-   (EF2) For all nonzero and in , .

However, one can show that (EF1) alone suffices to define a Euclidean domain, since any domain which can be endowed with a function satisfying (EF1) can also be endowed with a proper Euclidean function; that is, a function satisfying (EF1) and (EF2). Indeed, for }, one can define as follows:[1]

_f_(_a_) = min_(_x_ ∈ _R_ \ {0})_g_(_x__a_)

In words, one may define to be the minimum value attained by on the set of all non-zero elements of the principal ideal generated by .

A MULTIPLICATIVE EUCLIDEAN FUNCTION is a Euclidean function such that _f_(_a_)_f_(_b_)}} and is never zero. It follows that 1}}. More generally, 1}} if and only if is a unit.

Notes on the definition

Many authors use other terms in place of "Euclidean function", such as "degree function", "valuation function", "gauge function" or "norm function".[2] Some authors also require the domain of the Euclidean function to be the entire ring ;[3] however this does not essentially affect the definition, since (EF1) does not involve the value of . The definition is sometimes generalized by allowing the Euclidean function to take its values in any well-ordered set; this weakening does not affect the most important implications of the Euclidean property.

The property (EF1) can be restated as follows: for any principal ideal of with nonzero generator , all nonzero classes of the quotient ring have a representative with . Since the possible values of are well-ordered, this property can be established by proving that for any with minimal value of in its class. Note that, for a Euclidean function that is so established, there need not exist an effective method to determine and in (EF1).


Examples

Examples of Euclidean domains include:

-   Any field. Define 1}} for all nonzero .
-   , the ring of integers. Define {{!}}_n_{{!}}}}, the absolute value of .[4]

-   , the ring of Gaussian integers. Define _a_ + _b_}}, the norm of the Gaussian integer .

-   (where is a primitive (non-real) cube root of unity), the ring of Eisenstein integers. Define _a_ − _ab_ + _b_}}, the norm of the Eisenstein integer .

-   , the ring of polynomials over a field . For each nonzero polynomial , define to be the degree of .[5]

-   , the ring of formal power series over the field . For each nonzero power series , define as the order of , that is the degree of the smallest power of occurring in . In particular, for two nonzero power series and , if and only if divides .

-   Any discrete valuation ring. Define to be the highest power of the maximal ideal containing . Equivalently, let be a generator of , and be the unique integer such that is an associate of , then define _v_}}. The previous example is a special case of this.
-   A Dedekind domain with finitely many nonzero prime ideals . Define $f(x) = \sum_{i=1}^n v_i(x)$, where is the discrete valuation corresponding to the ideal .[6]

Examples of domains that are _not_ Euclidean domains include:

-   Every domain that is not a principal ideal domain, such as the ring of polynomials in at least two indeterminates over a field, or the ring of univariate polynomials with integer coefficients, or the number ring .
-   The ring of integers of , consisting of the numbers where and are integers and both even or both odd. It is a principal ideal domain that is not Euclidean.
-   The ring is also a principal ideal domain that is not Euclidean.


Properties

Let _R_ be a domain and _f_ a Euclidean function on _R_. Then:

-   _R_ is a principal ideal domain (PID). In fact, if _I_ is a nonzero ideal of _R_ then any element _a_ of _I_\{0} with minimal value (on that set) of _f_(_a_) is a generator of _I_.[7] As a consequence _R_ is also a unique factorization domain and a Noetherian ring. With respect to general principal ideal domains, the existence of factorizations (i.e., that _R_ is an atomic domain) is particularly easy to prove in Euclidean domains: choosing a Euclidean function _f_ satisfying (EF2), _x_ cannot have any decomposition into more than _f_(_x_) nonunit factors, so starting with _x_ and repeatedly decomposing reducible factors is bound to produce a factorization into irreducible elements.
-   Any element of _R_ at which _f_ takes its globally minimal value is invertible in _R_. If an _f_ satisfying (EF2) is chosen, then the converse also holds, and _f_ takes its minimal value exactly at the invertible elements of _R_.
-   If the Euclidean property is algorithmic, i.e., if there is a division algorithm that for given _a_ and nonzero _b_ produces a quotient _q_ and remainder _r_ with _bq_ + _r_}} and either 0}} or , then an extended Euclidean algorithm can be defined in terms of this division operation.[8]
-   If a Euclidean domain is not a field then it has an element _a_ with the following property: any element _x_ not divisible by _a_ can be written as _x_=_ay_+_u_ for some unit _u_ and some element _y_. This follows by taking _a_ to be a non-unit with _f_(_a_) as small as possible. This strange property can be used to show that some principal ideal domains are not Euclidean domains, as not all PIDs have this property. For example, for _d_ = −19, −43, −67, −163, the ring of integers of $\mathbb Q(\sqrt{d})$ is a PID which is Euclidean, but the cases _d_ = −1, −2, −3, −7, −11 Euclidean.[9]

However, in many finite extensions of Q with trivial class group, the ring of integers is Euclidean (not necessarily with respect to the absolute value of the field norm; see below). Assuming the extended Riemann hypothesis, if _K_ is a finite extension of Q and the ring of integers of _K_ is a PID with an infinite number of units, then the ring of integers is Euclidean.[10] In particular this applies to the case of totally real quadratic number fields with trivial class group. In addition (and without assuming ERH), if the field _K_ is a Galois extension of Q, has trivial class group and unit rank strictly greater than three, then the ring of integers is Euclidean.[11] An immediate corollary of this is that if the number field is Galois over Q, its class group is trivial and the extension has degree greater than 8 then the ring of integers is necessarily Euclidean.


Norm-Euclidean fields

Algebraic number fields _K_ come with a canonical norm function on them: the absolute value of the field norm _N_ that takes an algebraic element _α_ to the product of all the conjugates of _α_. This norm maps the ring of integers of a number field _K_, say _O__(_K_), to the nonnegative rational integers, so it is a candidate to be a Euclidean norm on this ring. If this norm satisfies the axioms of a Euclidean function then the number field _K_ is called _norm-Euclidean_ or simply _Euclidean_.[12][13] Strictly speaking it is the ring of integers that is Euclidean since fields are trivially Euclidean domains, but the terminology is standard.

If a field is not norm-Euclidean then that does not mean the ring of integers is not Euclidean, just that the field norm does not satisfy the axioms of a Euclidean function. In fact, the rings of integers of number fields may be divided in several classes:

-   Those that are not principal and therefore not Euclidean, such as the integers of $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{-5})$
-   Those that are principal and not Euclidean, such as the integers of $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{-19})$
-   Those that are Euclidean and not norm-Euclidean, such as the integers of $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{69})$ [14]
-   Those that are norm-Euclidean, such as Gaussian integers (integers of $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{-1})$)

The norm-Euclidean quadratic fields have been fully classified; they are $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{d})$, where _d_ takes the values

    −11, −7, −3, −2, −1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 29, 33, 37, 41, 57, 73 .[15]

Every Euclidean imaginary quadratic field is norm-Euclidean and is one of the five first fields in the preceding list.


See also

-   Valuation (algebra)


Notes


References

-   John B. Fraleigh, Victor J. Katz. _A first course in abstract algebra_. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 5 ed., 1967.
-   Pierre Samuel, "About Euclidean rings", Journal of Algebra 19 (1971) 282-301.

Category:Ring theory Category:Commutative algebra Domain

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 377, Example 1

[5] Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 377, Example 2

[6]

[7] Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 377, Theorem 7.4

[8] Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 380, Theorem 7.7

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]