_FAMILIAR_ is a play written by Danai Gurira, commissioned by Yale Repertory Theatre.[1]


Productions

_Familiar_ had its world premiere at Yale Repertory Theatre in New Haven, Connecticut on January 30, 2015.[2] It ran through February 2015. The production was directed by Rebecca Taichman.

The play opened Off-Broadway at Playwright's Horizons as a limited engagement on February 10, 2016 in previews.[3] After receiving critical success, the run was extended and _Familiar_ ran until April 10, 2016.[4] The production at Playwright's Horizons was also directed by Rebecca Taichman.

The play was performed in January-March 2019 at The Old Globe in San Diego, directed by Edward Torres. [5]


Synopsis

_Familiar_ takes place in the winter of late 2011 at the home of Marvelous and Donald Chinyaramwira in a suburb of Minneapolis, Minnesota. The story focuses on a Zimbabwean family that is preparing for the wedding of their eldest daughter, Tendikayi (addressed as Tendi) who is first generation American. The play opens on Marvelous (often called Marvi by other characters), Donald, and their youngest daughter Nyasha awaiting the arrival of Tendi and her fiance Chris (who is white). We are introduced to Margaret, Marvelous’s youngest sister who comes to join in the pre-wedding festivities. Tendi and Chris arrive along with Anne, Marvelous’s eldest sister, who still lives in Zimbabwe. Tendi and Chris tell Marvelous and Donald that they wish to perform the Roora ceremony (or bride price), a Zimbabwean wedding tradition, and have it facilitated by Anne. This angers Marvelous who wishes to keep the family rooted in American, Christian tradition. The play grapples with African-American identity and tradition and the clashing of ideals.[6]


Characters and Cast

  Character                             Yale Repertory Theatre Cast   Playwright's Horizons Cast
  ------------------------------------- ----------------------------- ----------------------------
  Nyasha                                Shyko Amos                    Ito Aghayere
  Chris                                 Ross Marquand                 Joby Earle
  Margaret Munyewa (Mai Tongai)         Patrice Johnson Chevannes     Melanie Nicholls-King
  Tendikayi                             Cherise Boothe                Roslyn Ruff
  Donald Chinyaramwira (Mai Tonhgai)    Harvy Blanks                  Harold Surratt
  Anne (Mai Carol)                      Kimberly Scott                Myra Lucretia Taylor
  Brad                                  Joe Tippett
  Marvelous Chinyaramwira (Mai Tendi)   Saidah Arrika Ekulona         Tamara Tunie


Critical response

_Familiar_ opened to positive critical reviews for the New York engagement at Playwrights Horizons from the _New York Times_, and _New York Magazine_ among others.

Charles Isherwood of _The New York Times_ called the play “fiercely funny” and remarked on the production’s contrasting tone to Gurira’s play _Eclipsed_ writing “Although it is just as accomplished, _Familiar_ is a play written in a significantly lighter key, even as it probes with subtlety and smarts the subject of immigration and assimilation — a topic of major currency these days.” He goes on to compliment Gurira and Rebecca Taichman (the director of the production) “Ms. Gurira weaves issues of cultural identity and displacement, generational frictions and other meaty matters into dialogue that flows utterly naturally. Her engaging characters are drawn with sympathy and, under the crisp direction of Rebecca Taichman, _Familiar_ stays firmly on course even as the complications pile up".[7]

Marilyn Stasio of _Variety Magazine_ had contrary thoughts of the play's second act. She wrote “Sorry to say, the warm feelings generated by this open-hearted play turn cold in the second act. Seemingly unsure of where to go with all the plot possibilities she raises, Gurira makes the worst possible choice of darkening the narrative by revealing unbelievable and out-of-character family secrets".[8]

The play received positive reviews for its New Haven production. Of the New Haven production Anita Gates of _The New York Times_ remarks "_Familiar_ is a turn from world politics and international crises toward domestic comic drama, and she [Gurira] makes the transition seamlessly".[9]


Awards and nominations

Off-Broadway production[10]

+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+--------------+--------+
| Year                                   | Award                                  | Category                                | Nominee      | Result |
+========================================+========================================+=========================================+==============+========+
| 2016                                   | Obie Awards                            | Distinguished Performance by an Actress | Tamara Tunie |        |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+--------------+--------+
| Lucille Lortel Awards                  | Outstanding Lead Actress in a Play     | Ito Aghayere                            |              |        |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+--------------+--------+
| Outstanding Featured Actress in a Play | Myra Lucretia Taylor                   |                                         |              |        |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+--------------+--------+
| Outer Critics Circle Award             | Outstanding Featured Actress in a Play | Myra Lucretia Taylor                    |              |        |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+--------------+--------+
| Outstanding New Off-Broadway Play      |                                        |                                         |              |        |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+--------------+--------+
| Drama Desk Awards                      | Sam Norkin Award                       | Danai Gurira                            |              |        |
+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+--------------+--------+


Publication

-   Gurira, Danai. Familiar. New York Public Library for the Performing Arts Billy Rose Theatre Division, 2016.


References

Category:American plays

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]