FM-2030 (originally born as FEREIDOUN M. ESFANDIARY (); October 15, 1930 – July 8, 2000) was a Belgian-born Iranian-American author, teacher, transhumanist philosopher, futurist, consultant and athlete.[1]

He became notable as a transhumanist with the book _Are You a Transhuman?: Monitoring and Stimulating Your Personal Rate of Growth in a Rapidly Changing World_, published in 1989. In addition, he wrote a number of works of fiction under his original name F.M. Esfandiary.


Early life and education

The son of an Iranian diplomat, he travelled widely as a child, living in 17 countries by age 11; then, as a young man, he represented Iran as a basketball player at the 1948 Olympic Games in London[2] and served on the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine from 1952 to 1954.[3]


Name change

In the mid-1970s F.M. Esfandiary legally[4] changed his name to FM-2030 for two main reasons. Firstly, to reflect the hope and belief that he would live to celebrate his 100th birthday in 2030; secondly, and more importantly, to break free of the widespread practice of naming conventions that he saw as rooted in a collectivist mentality, and existing only as a relic of humankind's tribalistic past. He viewed traditional names as almost always stamping a label of collective identity - varying from gender to nationality - on the individual, thereby existing as prima facie elements of thought processes in the human cultural fabric, that tended to degenerate into stereotyping, factionalism, and discrimination. In his own words, "Conventional names define a person's past: ancestry, ethnicity, nationality, religion. I am not who I was ten years ago and certainly not who I will be in twenty years. [...] The name 2030 reflects my conviction that the years around 2030 will be a magical time. In 2030 we will be ageless and everyone will have an excellent chance to live forever. 2030 is a dream and a goal."[5]


Personal life

He was a lifelong vegetarian and said he would not eat anything that had a mother.[6] FM-2030 once said, "I am a 21st century person who was accidentally launched in the 20th. I have a deep nostalgia for the future."[7] He taught at The New School, University of California, Los Angeles, and Florida International University.[8] He worked as a corporate consultant for Lockheed and J. C. Penney.[9] He was also an atheist.[10] FM-2030 was, in his own words, a follower of "upwing" politics, in which he meant that he endorsed universal progress.[11][12]


Death

On July 8, 2000, FM-2030 died from pancreatic cancer and was placed in cryonic suspension at the Alcor Life Extension Foundation in Scottsdale, Arizona, where his body remains today. He did not yet have remote standby arrangements, so no Alcor team member was present at his death, but FM-2030 was the first person to be vitrified, rather than simply frozen as previous cryonics patients had been.[13] FM-2030 was survived by four sisters and one brother.[14]


Published works

Fiction

-   _The Day of Sacrifice_ (1959) available as an eBook
-   _The Beggar_ (1965)
-   _Identity Card_ (1966) () available as an eBook

Non-fiction

-   _Optimism one; the emerging radicalism_ (1970) ()
-   _UpWingers: A Futurist Manifesto_ (1973) () (pbk.) Available as an eBook ISBN FW00007527, Publisher: e-reads, Pub. Date: Jan 1973, File Size: 153K
-   _Telespheres_ (1977) ()
-   _Are You a Transhuman?: Monitoring and Stimulating Your Personal Rate of Growth in a Rapidly Changing World_ (1989) ().


References


See also

-   Blue skies research


External links

-   Intimacy in a Fluid World, by F.M. Esfandiary
-   NPR story about FM-2030
-   Ilija Trojanow on F.M. Esfandiary: Searching for Identity in Iran's Labyrinthine Bureaucracy
-   "Are You a Transhuman?: Monitoring and Stimulating Your Personal Rate of Growth in a Rapidly Changing World" (PDF)
-   FM-2030 interview on CNN Larry King Live, in 1990

Category:1930 births Category:2000 deaths Category:Cryonically preserved people Category:Deaths from pancreatic cancer Category:Florida International University faculty Category:Futurologists Category:Iranian atheists Esfandiary Category:Iranian emigrants to the United States Category:Iranian writers Esfandiary Esfandiary Category:Writers from Miami Category:The New School faculty Category:Life extensionists Category:University of California, Los Angeles faculty Category:People from Brussels Category:Iranian transhumanists Category:American atheists Category:American transhumanists

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10] Esfandiary, F.M. Upwingers: A Futurist Manifesto. p. 185.

[11] Ninety-degree revolution: Right and Left are fading away. The real question in politics will be: do you look to the earth or aspire to the skies?

[12] Empowerment Politics: Left Wing, Right Wing, and Up Wing

[13]

[14]