In mathematics, more specifically in the area of abstract algebra known as Galois theory, the GALOIS GROUP of a certain type of field extension is a specific group associated with the field extension. The study of field extensions and their relationship to the polynomials that give rise to them via Galois groups is called Galois theory, so named in honor of Évariste Galois who first discovered them.

For a more elementary discussion of Galois groups in terms of permutation groups, see the article on Galois theory.


Definition

Suppose that is an extension of the field (written as and read " over "). An automorphism of is defined to be an automorphism of that fixes pointwise. In other words, an automorphism of is an isomorphism from to such that _x_}} for each . The set of all automorphisms of forms a group with the operation of function composition. This group is sometimes denoted by .

If is a Galois extension, then is called the "Galois group of (the extension) over , and is usually denoted by .[1]

If is not a Galois extension, then the Galois group of (the extension) over is sometimes defined as , where is the Galois closure of .


Examples

In the following examples is a field, and , , are the fields of complex, real, and rational numbers, respectively. The notation indicates the field extension obtained by adjoining an element to the field .

-   is the trivial group that has a single element, namely the identity automorphism.

-   has two elements, the identity automorphism and the complex conjugation automorphism.[2]

-   is trivial. Indeed, it can be shown that any automorphism of must preserve the ordering of the real numbers and hence must be the identity.

-   is an infinite group.

-   has two elements, the identity automorphism and the automorphism which exchanges + and −.

-   Consider the field Q()}}. The group contains only the identity automorphism. This is because is not a normal extension, since the other two complex cube roots of 2 are missing from the extension—in other words is not a splitting field.
-   Consider now Q(, _ω_)}}, where is a primitive cube root of unity. The group is isomorphic to , the dihedral group of order 6, and is in fact the splitting field of over .
-   If is a prime power, and if GF(_q_)}} and GF(_q_^(_n_))}} denote the Galois fields of order and respectively, then is cyclic of order and generated by the Frobenius homomorphism.
-   If is an irreducible polynomial of prime degree with rational coefficients and exactly two nonreal roots, then the Galois group of is the full symmetric group .


Properties

The significance of an extension being Galois is that it obeys the fundamental theorem of Galois theory: the closed (with respect to the Krull topology) subgroups of the Galois group correspond to the intermediate fields of the field extension.

If is a Galois extension, then can be given a topology, called the Krull topology, that makes it into a profinite group.


See also

-   Absolute Galois group
-   Demushkin group
-   Solvable group


Notes


References

-   -


External links

-   -

Category:Galois theory

[1] Some authors refer to as the Galois group for arbitrary extensions and use the corresponding notation, e.g. .

[2] .