_GAMMA WORLD_ is a science fantasy role-playing game, originally designed by James M. Ward and Gary Jaquet, and first published by TSR in 1978. It borrowed heavily from Ward's earlier product, _Metamorphosis Alpha_.[1]


Setting

_Gamma World_ takes place in the mid-25th century, more than a century after a second nuclear war had destroyed human civilization. The war that destroyed civilization in _Gamma World_ is only vaguely described in most editions of the game, and what details are provided change from version to version:

-   The first two editions place a first nuclear war near the end of the 21st century, with the final war in the years AD 2309-2322, and ascribe the final annihilation to a terrorist group called "The Apocalypse"[2] and the ensuing retaliation by surviving factions.
    -   Later versions would radically alter the reason for the collapse.
-   The 2000 Alternity version is due to alien arrival and nuclear response.
-   The 2003 d20 Modern iteration is due to rampant use of nanotechnology and AI.
-   The 2010 edition introduces a humorous and radically different backstory that attributes the destruction of civilization to the activation of the Large Hadron Collider, which caused multiple realities to exchange features in an event known as "The Big Mistake".

All editions, however, agree that the cataclysm destroyed all government and society beyond a village scale, plunging the world into a Dark Age. In many editions of the game technology is at best quasi-medieval (in the first edition, the crossbow is described as "the ultimate weapon" for most Gamma World societies). Some, such as the 2003 and, to a lesser degree the 2010 edition, feature advanced technology that is well known and often easily available. In contrast, super-science artifacts in earlier editions were risky to use due to the average Gamma World character not knowing how to properly operate such devices, or possibly even what the device is at all. The post-apocalyptic inhabitants of Earth now refer to their planet as "Gamma World" (or "Gamma Terra" in later editions).

Gamma World is a chaotic, dangerous environment that little resembles pre-apocalyptic Earth. The weapons unleashed during the final war were strong enough to alter coastlines, level cities, and leave large areas of land lethally radioactive. These future weapons bathed the surviving life of Earth in unspecified forms of radiation and biochemical agents, producing widespread, permanent mutations among humans, animals, and plants. As a result, fantastic mutations such as extra limbs, super strength, and psychic powers are relatively common. (Random tables of such improbable mutations are a hallmark of every edition of _Gamma World_.) Many animals and plants are sentient, semi-civilized species competing with surviving humans. Both humans and non-humans have lost most knowledge of the pre-war humans, whom Gamma World's inhabitants refer to as "the Ancients". The only group with significant knowledge of the Ancients are isolated robots and other artificial intelligences that survived the war—though these machines tend to be damaged, in ill-repair, or hostile to organic beings.

_Gamma World_ player characters include unmutated humans (referred to as "Pure Strain Humans" in most editions), mutated humans, sentient animals or plants, and androids. Characters explore Ancient ruins and strange post-apocalyptic societies to gain knowledge of the Ancients and social status for themselves. Common adventure themes involve protecting fragile post-apocalypse societies, retrieving Ancient "artifacts" (science fiction gadgetry such as power armor, laser pistols, and anti-grav sleds), or mere survival against the multifarious dangers of the future (such as gun-toting mutant rabbits, rampaging ancient death machines, or other Gamma Worlders bent on mayhem).

A recurrent source of conflict on Gamma World is the rivalry among the "Cryptic Alliances", semi-secret societies whose ideological agendas—usually verging on monomania—often bring them into conflict with the rest of the Gamma World. For example, the Pure Strain Human "Knights of Genetic Purity" seek to exterminate all mutants, while the all-mutant "Iron Society" wants to eliminate unmutated humans. Other rivalries involve attitudes towards Ancient technology, with some Alliances (such as "The Restorationists") seeking to rebuild Ancient society, while others (such as "The Seekers") want to destroy remaining artifacts.


System

Throughout the game's many editions, _Gamma World_ has almost always remained strongly compatible with the then-current edition of _Dungeons & Dragons_ (_D&D_). Attribute generation is much the same for instance with a range of 3 to 18, randomly generated by rolling three six-sided dice. The attributes themselves are the same, but with occasional name changes such as Physical Strength instead of Strength and Mental Strength instead of Wisdom. This allows Gamma World and D&D characters to potentially cross over genres.

Character generation is mostly random, and features one of the game's most distinctive mechanics, the mutation tables. Players who choose to play mutants roll dice to randomly determine their characters' mutations. All versions of _Gamma World_ eschew a realistic portrayal of genetic mutation to one degree or another, instead giving characters fantastic abilities like psychic powers, laser beams, force fields, life draining and others. Other mutations are extensions or extremes of naturally existing features transposed from different species, such as electrical generation, infravision, quills, extra limbs, dual brains, carapaces, gills, etc. These were offset with defects that also ranged from the fantastical - such as skin that dissolves in water, or a scent that attracts monsters - to the mundane, such as seizures, madness and phobias.

Characters in most versions of _Gamma World_ earn experience points during their adventures, which cause the character's Rank (in some editions, Level) to increase. Unlike _D&D_, however, the first two editions of _Gamma World_ do not use a concept of true level or character class, and increases in Rank do not affect the character's skills or combat abilities. In fact, in the first three editions of the game, character rank is primarily a measure of the character's social prestige.

The game mechanics used for resolving character actions, on the other hand, greatly varied between _Gamma World_ editions. The first two editions, like the early editions of _D&D_, depend heavily on matrix-based mechanics, where two factors (one representing the actor or attacker, and one representing the opponent) are cross-referenced on a chart. For some actions, such as attacks, the number located on the matrix represents a number the acting player must roll. For other actions (such as determining the result of radiation exposure), the matrix result indicates a non-negotiable result. _Gamma_ Worlds first two editions had a variety of specialized matrices for different situations (again, closely resembling _D&D_).

The third edition rules replace specialized matrices with the Action Control Table (ACT), a single, color-coded chart that allowed players to determine whether a character action succeeded, and the degree of success, with a single roll. (The ACT concept is drawn from the _Marvel Super Heroes_ game published by TSR shortly before development of _Gamma World_'s third edition.) The ACT requires the referee to cross-reference the difficulty of a character action with the ability score used to complete that action, determining which column of the ACT is used for that action. The character's player then rolls percentile dice; the result is compared to appropriate column, determining a degree of success or failure and eliminating the need for second result roll (e.g. the damage roll that many games require after a successful combat action).

The fourth edition was directly compatible with 2nd Edition AD&D with some minor differences in mechanics. The fifth and sixth editions though would relegate Gamma World to that of a Campaign Setting and require the core books to play. 5th uses the Alternity system which is mostly represented in the book but required the core rules in order to resolve some factors. 6th Edition though was fully incomplete on its own and required the d20 Modern rulebook in order to play the game.

The seventh version uses a streamlined version of _D&D 4th edition_ mechanics. Character generation choice though was nearly fully removed. Instead of choosing a character class, a player had to roll a twenty-sided die two times and consult an accompanying character origin table. For example, a player might obtain the result "Radioactive Yeti" and gain the powers associated with the "Radioactive" and "Yeti" origins. Attributes, mutations, and skills were also randomly assigned. Two decks of cards comprising the core of a _Collectible Card Game_ are included with the game. One deck represented random Alpha Mutations, which could be drawn to gain temporary powers, and the other contained various Omega Tech, powerful technological devices that could possibly backfire on those that used them. Some 4th edition rules enhancements for the setting include new damage types such as "Radiation", Gamma World-specific skills, and increased lethality. Despite these differences, it is possible to use characters and monsters from a _D&D_ game in _Gamma World_ and vice versa.


History

First Edition (1978)

The original _Gamma World_ boxed set (containing a 56-page rulebook, a map of a devastated North America, and dice) was released in 1978. TSR went on to publish three accessories for the 1st edition of the game:

-   GW1, _Legion of Gold_ by Gary Gygax, Luke Gygax, and Paul Reiche III
-   GW2, _Famine in Far-Go_ by Michael Price
-   _Gamma World Referee's Screen_

Grenadier Miniatures also supported the game, with a line of licensed miniatures.[3]

At least one other TSR product was announced -- _Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega_, an adaptation of _Metamorphosis Alpha's_ campaign setting to _Gamma World's_ rules (Anon 1981). Work on the adaptation was halted when a 2nd edition of _Gamma World_ was announced. This was later released as _Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega_ using the _Amazing Engine_ Rules.

Second Edition (1983)

The second edition _Gamma World_ boxed set (with rules designed by Ward, Jaquet, and David James Ritchie) was released in 1983. Two modules and two accessories were released for this version:

-   GW3, _The Cleansing War of Garik Blackhand_ by Michael Price & Garry Spiegle
-   GW4, _The Mind Masters_ by Philip Taterczynski
-   GWAC1, _Gamma World Referee's Screen and Mini-Module_
-   GWAC2, _Gamma World Character Sheets_

TSR also produced four packs of _Gamma World_ miniatures.[4] TSR started production on a third adventure module, which was to be assigned the identification code GW5 and had the working title _Rapture of the Deep_. This module was not published. However, a 'ghost' Second Edition GW5 _Rapture of the Deep_ module was produced in 2007.

Third Edition (1986)

The 3rd edition of _Gamma World_ was another boxed set, credited to James M. Ward. It introduced the Action Control Table, a color-coded table used to resolve nearly all actions in the game. (Color-coded tables were something of a trend at TSR in mid-1980s. After 1984's _Marvel Super Heroes_ proved the viability of the concept, TSR revised _Gamma World_, _Star Frontiers_, and _Top Secret_ to use similar tables.) Unfortunately for TSR, this version of the rules became notorious for the number of editorial mistakes, including cross-references to rules that didn't appear in the boxed set. The errors were serious enough that TSR published a _Gamma World Rules Supplement_ containing the "missing" rules. The _Rules Supplement_ was sent to gamers who requested it by mail, and included in reprintings of the boxed set.

The five modules TSR published for _Gamma World's_ 3rd edition introduced the setting's first multi-module metaplot, which involved rebuilding an ancient 'sky chariot':

-   GW6, _Alpha Factor_ by Kim Eastland
-   GW7, _Beta Principle_ by Bruce Nesmith
-   GW8, _Gamma Base_ by Kim Eastland
-   GW9, _Delta Fragment_ by Kim Eastland
-   GW10, _Epsilon Cyborgs_ by Kim Eastland

TSR dropped the 3rd edition of _Gamma World_ from its product line before the multi-module storyline could be completed. In 2003 an unofficial conclusion to the series was published under the title GW11 _Omega Project_.

Despite its editorial issues, the 3rd edition rules were well-received enough to win the 1986/1987 Gamer's Choice Award for "Best Science-Fiction Roleplaying Game".

Fourth Edition (1992)

The 4th edition of _Gamma World_ was a 192-page softcover book, written by Bruce Nesmith and James M. Ward, published in May 1992 by TSR. This version of the game abandoned the 3rd edition's Action Control Table for mechanics resembling _2nd Edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons_. TSR published five accessories for the 4th edition:

-   GWA1, _Treasures of the Ancients_ by Dale "Slade" Henson ()
-   GWA2, _The Overlord of Bonparr_ by Jack A. Barker ()
-   GWQ1, _Mutant Master_ by Bruce Nesmith ()
-   GWQ2, _All Animals Are Equal_ by Dale "Slade" Henson ()
-   GWQ3, _Home Before the Sky Falls_ by Tim Beach, Paul Riegel, Drew Bittner, and Kim Eastland ()

TSR's _Gamma World_ development team announced at Gen Con 1993 that no further products would be released for the 4th edition. They also announced that TSR had restarted development of _Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega_, but that the manuscript would be completed using the _Amazing Engine_ rules.

Fifth edition (2000)

The 5th version of _Gamma World_ was a supplement for the science-fiction game _Alternity_. (In a nod to _Gamma World_'s reputation for being repeatedly revised, the book's back cover states "That's right, it's the return of the _Gamma World_".) The _Gamma World Campaign Setting_ () was a 192-page softcover book written by Andy Collins and Jeff Grubb, published in 2000 by Wizards of the Coast (WOTC), only a month after WOTC announced its cancellation of the _Alternity_ line. This version of _Gamma World_ is unique as the only one not to have accessories or supplements.

Omega World (2002)

In September 2002, _Omega World_, a _d20 System_ mini-game based on _Gamma World_ and written by Jonathan Tweet, was published in _Dungeon_ 94/_Polyhedron_ 153. Tweet does not plan any expansions for the game,[5] although it received a warm reception from _Gamma World_ fans and players new to the concept alike.

Sixth Edition (2003)

In November 2002, Sword & Sorcery Studios (SSS) announced that it had licensed the _Gamma World_ setting from WOTC in order to produce a sixth version of the game.[6] SSS's version of the game, which reached the market in 2003, used the _d20 Modern_ system, and mimicked _D&D_'s "three core book" model with three hardcover manuals:

-   _Gamma World Player's Handbook_ by Bruce Baugh, Ian Eller, Mikko Rautalahti, and Geoff Skellams
-   _Gamma World Game Master's Guide_ by Bruce Baugh, Werner Hager, Lizard, and Doug Oglesby
-   _Gamma World Mutants and Machines_ by David Bolack, Gareth Hanrahan, Patrick O'Duffy, and Chuck Wendig

Sword & Sorcery Studios also published three paperback supplements for the d20 version of _Gamma World_:

-   _Gamma World Beyond the Horizon_ by Ellen Kiley
-   _Gamma World Cryptic Alliances and Unknown Enemies_ by Owen K.C. Stephens, Alejandro Melchor, and Geoff Skellams
-   _Gamma World Out of the Vaults_ by James Maliszewski, John Snead, and Ellen P. Kiley

This new version of the game presented a more sober and serious approach to the concept of a post-nuclear world, at odds with the more light-hearted and adventurous approach taken by previous editions; it was also the first edition of the game to include fantastical nanotechnology on a large scale. In August 2005, White Wolf announced that it was reverting the rights to publish _Gamma World_ products back to Wizards of the Coast, putting the game out of print again.[7] Several critics and fans considered Tweet's _Omega World_ to be a superior d20 System treatment of the _Gamma World_ concept.[8]

Seventh Edition (2010)

At the Dungeons & Dragons Experience fan convention in early 2010, Wizards of the Coast announced a new version titled _D&D Gamma World_, eventually released in October of that year. The game is compatible with the D&D 4th Edition rules and the System Reference Document, but is not considered a separate D&D setting.[9]

The basic box included 80 non-random cards. In addition, random "boosters" of "Alpha Mutation" and "Omega Tech" cards for players are sold separately in packs of eight.[10]

This edition of _Gamma World_ includes the following three boxed sets (one core set and two expansion kits):

-   _D&D Gamma World Roleplaying Game_ by Richard Baker and Bruce R. Cordell
-   _D&D Gamma World Expansion Kit: Famine in Far-go_ by Robert J. Schwalb
-   _D&D Gamma World Expansion Kit: Legion of Gold_ by Richard Baker and Bruce Cordell

Additional content was released for the 7th Edition of _Gamma World_ at Game Day 2010 and at the 2010 Penny Arcade Expo, Trouble in Freesboro and Pax Extraterrestria respectively.[11][12] In addition, a Christmas themed adventure and vehicular combat rules were released online.[13][14]


Reception

Ronald Pehr reviewed _Gamma World_ in _The Space Gamer_ No. 32.[15] Pehr commented that "If you liked its progenitors, _Gamma World_ is an interesting variant. Beginning players should find it easy to learn, and referees are challenged to create a playable, balanced world. It's somewhat expensive and the sudden-death power of futuristic weaponry and the lack of character 'levels' may put you off, but if the basic premise is appealing you'll probably enjoy _Gamma World_."[16]


Reviews

-   _White Wolf_ #36 (1993)


See also

-   _Aftermath!_
-   _After The Bomb_
-   _d20 Apocalypse_
-   _d20 Future_
-   _Darwin's World_
-   _Gammarauders_
-   _Metamorphosis Alpha_
-   _Mutant Future_
-   _Rifts_
-   _Road Hogs_
-   _Traveller_
-   _Torg_
-   _Twilight 2000_
-   _Wasteland_


References


Further reading

-   Anon 1981. 'RPGA Interview with... Jim Ward.' _RPGA News_, 3:6-12 (Winter 1981-82).
-   Anon 1982. 'RPGA Interview with... "Jake" Jaquet.' _Polyhedron_, 4:6-10 (1982).
-   Rabe, Jean 1987. 'Notes from HQ,' _Polyhedron_, 38:3,23 (1987).
-   Ward, James and Harold Johnson 1986. 'Gamma III.' _Dragon_, 117:76-80 (Jan 1986).
-   Williams, Skip 1989. 'Advice for All Mutants.' _Dragon_, 149:28-30 (Sep 1989).

Category:Alternity Category:D20 System Gamma_World Category:Post-apocalyptic role-playing games Category:Role-playing games introduced in 1978 Category:Science fantasy role-playing games Category:Science fiction role-playing games Category:TSR (company) games

[1] Ward, James M., 'Metamorphosis Alpha.' _TSR Hobbies, Inc._ 1976

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9] _D&D Gamma World Roleplaying Game: A D&D Genre Setting_ by Wizards RPG Team ()

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13] 1

[14] 2

[15]

[16]