SIR GEORGE ARTHUR DROSTAN OGILVIE-FORBES [1](6 December 1891–10 July 1954) was a British diplomat who held two key postings in the years leading up to the Second World War, as chargé d'affaires in Madrid and Valencia 1936–37 and as Counsellor and chargé d'affaires in Berlin 1937–1939.[2] He was known for his humanitarian efforts in both situations.[3] In 2008 his name was included on a plaque in the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office, London, commemorating seven British diplomats "…who by their personal endeavours helped to rescue victims of Nazi racial policy".


Early life

Ogilvie-Forbes was born on 6 December 1891 in Edinburgh, son of an Aberdeenshire landowner. He was educated at The Oratory School, Beaumont College, Bonn University and New College Oxford. At Bonn, Ogilvie-Forbes studied modern languages, becoming fluent in French and German. In 1914 he joined the Scottish Horse Yeomanry, was wounded at Gallipoli and twice mentioned in Dispatches.[4] In 1916 he was promoted to Captain and became ADC to Lieutenant General Sir Frederick Stanley Maude the Commander-in-Chief, Mesopotamia and served on the General Staff.


Early diplomatic career

Ogilvie-Forbes joined HM Diplomatic Service in 1919[5] and early postings included Denmark, Finland, Yugoslavia and Mexico (1927–30). Ogilvie-Forbes served as the chargé d'affaires to the Holy See (1930–32) and then as Counsellor to Embassy in Baghdad (1932–35).[6] Ogilvie-Forbes was described as a "brilliant diplomat" who was a favorite protege of Sir Robert "Van" Vansittart, the Permanent Undersecretary at the Foreign Office 1930-37.


Spain 1936–1937

At the outbreak of the civil war in July 1936 several embassies, including the British, evacuated to Hendaye. Ogilvie-Forbes was appointed charge d'affaires in Madrid, which was then a war zone governed by the Republicans. British policy during the Spanish Civil War was officially that of non-intervention, but many believed at the time that this was a false image and subsequent opening of official records has shown the British government's support for Franco from the start. In contrast to this, Ogilvie-Forbes set out firstly to be as impartial as possible, and secondly to cultivate good relations with the differing factions within the Republican side because of the opportunity it provided for humanitarian aid and assistance to refugees from both sides of the conflict.[7] Ogilvie-Forbes witnessed first hand the terror waged by Spanish Communists and anarchists against the right in Madrid, but predicated if the Spanish Nationalists won the civil war, then the terror from the right against the left would be even worse. During his four and a half months running the embassy in Madrid the city was torn by the violence of the chaotic reign of terror within and the shelling by the Spanish Nationalist's army from the outside.

The historian Tom Buchanan wrote of Ogilvie-Forbes: "He had no interest in the competing ideologies in Spain … and never lost sight of the fact that the conflict represented above all, private suffering on an immense scale which it was within his power – in however small a way – to mitigate." Towards the end of 1936 the Foreign Office was keen for Ogilvie-Forbes to close the embassy in Madrid, whilst acknowledging "that in the present welter of agony he feels a personal call to continue as long as possible his work of mercy, and that he cannot leave without doing violence to his conscience." On 1 January 1937 after the Republican government moved out of Madrid, Ogilvie-Forbes was instructed to move the Embassy to Valencia.[8] Ogilvie-Forbes thought the order to move the embassy from Madrid to Valencia was "cowardly and dishonourable". Soon after that he was appointed as Counsellor to the British Embassy in Berlin.

By January 1937 British officials had helped in the evacuation of some 17,000 refugees. When Ogilvie-Forbes received his KCMG in May 1937 for his services in Spain, he pointed out in a letter to Anthony Eden that it was in recognition of all his colleagues who had helped him in Spain "often in terribly cruel circumstances". During this period, Ogilvie-Forbes exchanged letters on a weekly basis with Vansittart, whom kept well informed of developments in Germany.


Berlin 1937–1939

Ogilvie-Forbes was appointed Counsellor to the Embassy in Berlin in early April 1937. Sir Neville Henderson, the new ambassador, arrived shortly afterwards. It was unusual to replace an ambassador and his second-in-command at the same time especially in an embassy of such significance. Ogilvie-Forbes and Henderson had differing attitudes towards Hitler and the Nazi regime, and their personal relationship was strained from the start. In the various degrees of approach to Appeasement, Henderson certainly shared the views of Neville Chamberlain, and as far as possible he dealt with Chamberlain directly, regularly bypassing the Foreign Office. Henderson was appointed in the hope that he might befriend Hitler and thus help to moderate the latter's behaviour towards Britain. As late as February 1939 Henderson wrote "If we handle him (Hitler) right, my belief is that he will become gradually more pacific. But if we treat him as a pariah or mad dog we shall turn him irrevocably into one". From August 1937 onward, in the power struggle that developed between Henderson and Vansittart, Ogilvie-Forbes tended to back the latter, which made relations with the former very difficult. On 14 September 1938, Ogilvie-Forbes warned Ernst von Weizsäcker, the State Secretary of the _Auswärtiges Amt_, that the proposal of Neville Chamberlain to allow the Sudetenland to join Czechoslovakia showed how far Britain was willing to go to save the peace, but if Germany kept up its current negative attitude, then the result would be war. In speaking to Weizsacker, Ogilvie-Forbes was saying essentially the same thing as Henderson, but in far stronger and blunter language.

In October 1938, Ogilive-Forbes wrote to Sir Oliver Harvey, the Parliamentary Secretary to the Foreign Secretary, Lord Halifax: "In the major political business of this Embassy I have always been ignored. My views or participation are neither asked for nor wanted nor do I see the papers (and by no means all of them) until long after action It is also very difficult to work for one who is so often excited, rude and domineering over trivial and [sensitive? (text unclear)] matters and all the more discouraging because I have been constantly loyal to both his personality and his policy, as is my duty." O

By mid 1938 it was clear that Henderson was a very sick man, and in October he had to return to London and take five months leave for treatment for the cancer from which he died in 1942. During this time Ogilvie-Forbes was in charge of the embassy. He had a much more pessimistic view of Hitler than Henderson and this was reflected in his dispatches back to the Foreign Office. Ogilvie-Forbes shared the widespread feeling in Britain that the Treaty of Versailles had been too harsh on Germany and he had supported the Munich Agreement under the grounds that the Sudetenland should never had been included in Czechoslovakia in the first place. However, unlike Henderson, Ogilvie-Forbes believed that the Nazi regime had foreign policy goals that well went beyond revising the Treaty of Versailles and were aimed at winning Germany the "world power status" that she sought in the First World War.

In the work involving the implementation of the Munich Agreement as a joint Anglo-German-Franco-Italo commission had the task of deciding what districts of the Sudetenland were to join Germany, Ogilvie-Forbes became increasingly tired "of the Germans' arrogant and dictatorial actions, and their blatant disregard for the letter and spirit of Munich." On 11 October 1938, in one of his last instructions before he left Berlin, Henderson ordered Ogilvie-Forbes to accept the German definition of where the new German-Czechoslovak frontier should be, adding in that he hoped "that the Slovaks [would] stick it to the Czechs". Ogilvie-Forbes by contrast tried as much as possible to include majority Czech districts within Czecho-Slovakia as Czechoslovakia was renamed. By 26 October 1938, Ogilvie-Forbes had counted over 300 violations of the Munich Agreement as the Germans sought to claim districts of the Sudetenland that in fact majority Czech with the aim of making Czecho-Slovakia economically nonviable. He complained that the frontier claimed by the Germans was "cunningly" drawn to cause economic chaos as "almost all of the main arteries of Bohemia and Moravia must now traverse territory occupied by the Germans". As the Sudetenland was turned over stages to Germany in October-November 1938, Ogilvie-Forbes complained that the German authorities were expelling Jews from the Sudetenland in violation of the Munich Agreement, which stated all of the people living in the Sudetenland had the right to stay. On 17 November 1938, Weizsäcker presented Ogilvie-Forbes with a quasi-ultimatum claiming a district of Czecho-Slovakia which as the latter noted as "populated by about 6,000 Germans and 50,000 Czechs". Ogilvie-Forbes wrote that to agree to this "would appear to be truckling to an unreasonable demand and out of accord with the terms and the spirit of the Munich agreement" while also writing "to refuse would be regarded by the Germans as contrary to His Majesty's Government's policy of Anglo-German rapprochement as recorded at Munich". The Foreign Secretary, Lord Halifax, ordered Ogilvie-Forbes to accept the German demand despite the way it clearly violated the Munich agreement, which stated that only districts of the Sudetenland that were 50% ethnically German or more based on the outdated Austrian census of 1910 (rather than the more recent Czechoslovak census of 1930) were to go to Germany.

In the months that followed, his appraisal of the situation was bleak, emphasising that Hitler could not be trusted and "had unlimited aims of world domination and an ‘insensate’ hatred of Britain...That appeasement could never succeed...That the German economy was solely directed towards military ends...and Hitler could only be removed after a military defeat – Britain would have to choose between war and surrender." He could see no possibility at all of Goering (whom he knew personally) leading a movement against the Fuhrer, and dismissed the idea of an internal German revolt to overthrow the Nazis. On 21 October 1938, Ogilvie-Forbes attended a speech by the Propaganda minister Josef Goebbels in Hamburg, which he summarised as: "filled with a glorification of force and of its successful employment by the Nationalist-Socialist leadership."

It has been argued by the Canadian historian Bruce Strang, that during the time of Henderson's absence, Ogilvie-Forbes, was able to have a significant effect on British Foreign policy, as he wrote: "It was not a coincidence that the decisive turn in the Cabinet's perception of Hitler occurred while Sir George Ogilvie-Forbes temporarily headed the Berlin Embassy, as he helped to undermine Chamberlain's often inaccurate views, and to create the climate of moral revulsion and the heightened sense of danger in which the Cabinet operated."

This "moral revulsion" was perhaps most keenly conveyed by the barrage of strongly worded reports concerning the plight of the Jews in Germany sent by Ogilvie-Forbes. In a letter to the Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax after _Kristallnacht_ (10 November 1938), Ogilvie-Forbes described how he and members of his staff witnessed the looting and destruction of Jewish property. The attacks, he wrote, started at a given hour, targeted with uncanny precision Jewish shops and buildings and ended on the word of Goebbels who condoned what had been done. Towards the end of his letter Ogilvie-Forbes wrote "I think the murder of Herr vom Rath by a German born Polish Jew has only accelerated the elimination of the Jews which has for long been planned...It has let loose the forces of mediaeval barbarism...I can find no words strong enough in condemnation of the disgusting treatment of innocent people and the civilized world is faced with the appalling sight of 500,000 people about to rot away in starvation." He pointed out that this is not just a national problem but also a world problem. On 13 November 1938, Ogilvie-Forbes reported after _Kristalnacht_ that many German Jews "are wandering about in the streets and parks afraid to return to their homes...I can find no words strong enough in condemnation of the disgusting treatment of so many innocent people and the civilised world is faced with the appalling sight of 500, 000 people about to rot away in starvation".

Ogilvie-Forbes was in contact with members of the German opposition, who provided intelligence such as a copy of Hitler's secret speech to a group of 200 German journalists on 10 November 1938 saying he wanted more bellicose media coverage to prepare Germany for war. Ogilvie-Forbes also noted in the secret speech that Hitler called for Britain to be presented as "public enemy number one" and he kept hearing rumors that Hitler was planning to renounce the Anglo-German Naval Agreement. In this regard, Ogilvie-Forbes noted the German media was entirely Anglophobic with France being spared any abuse, which led him to the conclusion that Hitler was trying to sever France from Britain, so could take on the latter alone without confronting the former. That Hitler gave the departing French ambassador André François-Poncet a medal at their last meeting in October 1938 for his work in improving Franco-German relations thus assumed a rather sinister significance for Ogilvie-Forbes. Amongst Ogilvie-Forbes's sources were Carl Friedrich Goerdeler, Ewald von Kleist-Schmenzin, Fabian von Schlabrendorff, and the mysterious man with the surname Ritter whom Ogilive-Forbes called K (as in knight, the equivalent English word for Ritter). Just whom K. was remains a mystery as the files from British Embassy state his surname was Ritter (a common surname in Germany) and nothing else. K. reported that he seen a plan to have the Luftwaffe prepare a bombing campaign to set London ablaze.. At the same time, Ogilive-Forbes noted the increasing anti-British tone of the German media, evidence that Hitler had given orders to increase the size of the Luftwaffe and Kriegsmarine (which suggested German foreign policy was indeed turning anti-British), and information that Germany was moving over to a "total war" economy. Ogilivie-Forbes portrayed Hitler as a leader who was barely sane, if at all, and suggested he was eminently capable of a "mad dog act", a sudden, reckless act of aggression that would plunge the world into a world war. Lord Halifax was known as the "Holy Fox" due to his cunning and his devotion to the Church of England, and Ogilvie-Forbes's picture of a brutal Nazi regime running roughshod over innocent German Jews disturbed Halifax's Anglican conscience.

At a meeting of the Foreign Policy Committee on 14 November 1938, Halifax cited Ogilvie-Forbes's dispatches as a reason for a tougher line with Germany. At a meeting of the cabinet, only the War Secretary Leslie Hore-Belisha supported Lord Halifax's proposals for "economic offensive" to keep the Balkans out of the German economic sphere of influence with Chamberlain; the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir John Simon; and the President of the Board of Trade, Sir Oliver Stanley, all condemning Halifax's plans as "economically unsound". The information from K. about the purported plan to raze London had more impact on British policy with Sir Alexander Cadogan writing in his diary about Chamberlain's reaction: "Glad he takes it seriously." At a meeting of the Committee of Imperial Defense called to discuss the information from K., Lord Halifax's proposed staff talks with the French and propaganda around the world to counter the anti-British propaganda campaign coming from Germany as Goebbels was attacking Britain not just in Germany, but all around the world. Through Chamberlain dismissed the possibility of a surprise German bombing attack on London as unlikely, the Home Secretary, Sir Samuel Hoare, generally regarded as an ally of Chamberlain, came out in support of Lord Halifax. Through Halifax did not win this debate, the fact that he won over several cabinet ministers to his side showed what direction the cabinet was moving.{sfn|Strang|1994|p=122}}

In a dispatch to London on 6 December 1938, Ogilvie-Forbes quoted from _Mein Kampf_ to argue that for Hitler Germany could not obtain "world power status" without first winning _Lebensraum_ ("living space") in Russia. Ogilvie argued that with the _Reich_ rearmed and in possession of Austria and the Sudetenland, that what he was hearing from sources in Berlin was "that Herr Hitler is about to embark on the third stage of his programme, namely expansion beyond the boundaries of the territories inhabited by Germans. How exactly this is be achieved is the object of much speculation. One thing is certain: Nazi aims are on a grandiose scale, and there is no limit to their ultimate ambitions". Some sources were telling Ogilvie-Forbes that Hitler was planning to attack the Soviet Union in 1939 to establish "an independent Russian Ukraine under German tutelage", and afterwards Germany would expand into the Balkans and seek an "outlet on the Mediterranean via Italy". Other sources were telling Ogilvie-Forbes that Hitler was thinking about turning west in 1939 to "liquidate" France and Britain before Germany fell behind in the arms race. Ogilvie-Forbes quoted one German official as saying to him that Hitler was still undecided about whatever he would turn west or east in 1939, but "it is the profound conviction of almost every thinking German that the tiger [Hitler] will jump soon".

Ogilvie-Forbes further reported that Hitler regarded the Munich Agreement as a diplomatic defeat as what he wanted was a war to "smash" Czechoslovakia, not an agreement to hand over the Sudetenland. Ogilvie-Forbes wrote that his sources were telling him that Hitler had wished he had taken a "stronger line" at the Munich conference, was now "abusing his moderate counselors for their pusillanimity" and had "dubbed all his generals cowards" for advising him not to attack Czechoslovakia in September 1938. Sir William Strang of the Foreign Office's Central Department wrote after reading the dispatch of 6 December: "This dispatch is a plain warning which ought not to be ignored. Unless we can rapidly and effectively increase our immediate powers of resistance, the expectation of the life of the British Empire may be shorter than we are perhaps ready to suppose". In another dispatch, Ogilvie-Forbes reported that the Nazi regime was upset that the British spending on defense had not decreased after the Munich Agreement as expected, and that Hitler was planning to increase in defense spending in order to win the arms race and allowed Germany to dominate Europe. On 2 January 1939, Ogivlie Forbes endorsed a report from the military attache Colonel Noel Mason-MacFarlane. Ogilvie-Forbes supported the conclusion of Mason-MacFarlane that another war was imminent even if he could not predicate for certain what Hitler would do in 1939 "what is certain is that the military and civilian resources of the country are prepared for an emergency". Mason-MacFarlane wrote he believed that given the current political and economic problems faced by the _Reich_ that Hitler would almost certainly resort to "some foreign excursion" as the way out and that the German economy and military were on "full throttle" for war. Ogilvie-Forbes also endorsed Mason-MacFarlane conclusion that Lord Halifax work to strength Anglo-French ties and to encourage the French to improve their ties with their allies in Eastern Europe, saying that a combination of Britain and France was the only thing that could deter Hitler from choosing war. Ogilvie-Forbes also approved of Mason-MacFarlane's warning that Hitler would probably strike one of the states of Eastern Europe, such as Czecho-Slovakia (as Czechoslovakia had been renamed in October 1938), Poland or the Soviet Union in order to exploit their natural resources and people before turning west to strike at France and Great Britain.

On 3 January 1939, Ogilvie-Forbes engaged in what Ascher called an act of personal appeasement towards Henderson, when he wrote in a dispatch that the Wehrmacht was so overwhelmingly powerful that there was now nothing Britain could do to stop Germany from dominating Eastern Europe, and that British diplomats should make more efforts "to cultivate Field Marshal Göring and the moderate Nazis with a view to their exercising a restraining influence on the extremists such as Ribbentrop, Goebbels, and Himmler who at present have the ear of Hitler". In the same dispatch, he wrote that Göring "is so devotedly loyal to his chief that I see no indication whatever of his leading a movement against the Führer". Ascher wrote that this dispatch is so completely at odds with the rest of the dispatches Ogilvie-Forbes sent between October 1938-February 1939 that it is hard to guess what Ogilvie-Forbes was thinking when he wrote it. Ascher argued that the most likely explanation was that the dispatch of 3 January was meant to appease Henderson when he returned to the embassy in Berlin, as Ogilvie-Forbes knew that Henderson would disapprove of what he was writing, as indeed he did.

In a dispatch in January 1939, Ogilvie-Forbes warned that Hitler was planning to turn the Franco-German friendship pact of 6 December 1938 into a non-aggression pact, which leave Britain alone as the _Reich_'s main enemy in western Europe. Afterwards, he predicated that if he was what he was hearing upon Hitler's plans for an expanded Luftwaffe and Kriegsmarine was true, that Germany would launch an air-naval offensive against Britain with the Luftwaffe to bomb British cities into the ground while the Kriegsmarine would sink the British Merchant Marine, causing a famine (Britain's population exceeded its agricultural capacity). In this regard, Ogilvie-Forbes stated that he kept hearing rumors that Hitler was planning to seizing the Netherlands to provide air bases closer to Britain.. Ogilive-Forbes ended by writing that there was no resistance movement in Germany that was powerful to overthrow the Nazi regime, and Hitler could be overthrown externally.

In the Berlin Embassy's annual report for 1938 Ogilvie-Forbes notes that at the beginning of the year it was ascertained that there were 15,700 prisoners at Dachau of whom over 12,000 were Jewish who were being subjected to harsh treatment. In the concentration camp at Buchenwald there were 30,000 Jews who were in many cases treated with brutality. He warned that unless Hitler were stopped by war then the Jews "extermination in Germany can only be a matter of time." Ogilvie-Forbes argued on several occasions that the British Government might persuade Hitler to use the one billion _Reichmark_ fine, which had been levied against the entire community of German Jews after _Kristalnacht_ to punish them for having allegedly provoked the pogrom against themselves, to fund Jewish emigration, an action that he believed could really save Jewish lives. The government ignored this suggestion. He was also keen to point out that Nazi anti-Semitism was symptomatic of Hitler's frame of mind; that it was Hitler who was personally conducting the campaign against the Jews. The American historian Abraham Ascher, himself a German Jew who fled the Third Reich, wrote that there was a real sense of personal empathy with the sufferings of German Jews in Ogilvie-Forbes's dispatches that Henderson never displayed. Unlike Henderson, Ogilvie-Forbes attached far greater significance to Nazi antisemitism.

After Hitler gave his "Prophecy Speech" to the _Reichstag_ on 30 January 1939, Ogilvie-Forbes wrote the "extermination" of the Jews in Germany "can only be a matter of time". Ogilvie-Forbes wrote that antisemitism in Germany was "not a national, but a world problem, which if neglected, contains the seeds of a terrible vengeance". As regards helping individual Jews to escape from the Nazis, in his position as a senior diplomat Ogilvie-Forbes could not be seen to be "bending the rules". However, he was able to help an acquaintance, Klaus Neuberg and secure the release of his son and three nephews from Sachsenhausen, and the subsequent move of eight of the family to New Zealand. This was organised through Captain Frank Foley, the passport control officer in the embassy, whom Ogilvie-Forbes supported, unofficially, in his work to enable thousands of Jews to escape. Ogilvie-Forbes's dispatches had an impact on British foreign policy decision-making in the winter of 1938-39 as Lord Halifax who during this period was consistently the member of the Chamberlain cabinet most toughest on Germany, used the dispatches from Berlin to argue in the cabinet that Britain needed a harder line with the _Reich_. In part because of the dispatches written by Ogilive-Forbes, Britain announced a "guarantee" of France, the Low Countries and Switzerland in February 1939, warning that any German aggression against those states would automatically lead to war with the United Kingdom..

When Henderson returned to Berlin on 13 February 1939, his first act was to assemble the senior embassy staff to castigate Ogilvie-Forbes for what he had written in his dispatches during his absence. Henderson announced that henceforward all dispatches from the embassy to Berlin would have to conform to his views and that any diplomat he disobeyed this directive would be fired from the Foreign Office. In a lengthy dispatch Henderson sent on 6 March 1939, he denounced almost everything that Ogilvie-Forbes had written during his absence.

Shortly after 1:30 am on the night of 27-28 August 1939, Ogilvie-Forbes was woken up by the Swedish businessman Birger Dahlerus who was acting as a self-appointed peace-maker with a message that he had a peace plan from Hermann Göring to prevent the Danzig crisis from turning into a war. On the morning of 28 August 1939, when Henderson returned from the Reich Chancellery where he met Hitler to discuss the Dahlerus peace plan, a meeting that did not go well, Ogilive-Forbes warned Dahlerus that his plan to stop a war were unraveling. On 30 August, Ogilvie-Forbes phoned Baron Bernardo Attolico, the Italian ambassador to Germany, and unaware that the _Forschungsamat_ ("research office") was listening in, stated everyone in the British Embassy was waiting for London to reply to Dahlerus's peace plan, saying that longer they waited, the better, as he hoped to drag out talks to resolve the Danzig crisis into the fall, which would weaken the chances of Germany invading Poland, as the autumn rains would turn the unpaved Polish country roads into mud. On 31 August, Ogilive-Forbes phoned Dahlerus to tell him that he heard that Ribbentrop had told Hitler that Britain would do nothing if the _Reich_ should invade Poland, an assessment that he felt more war more likely than not.

Later that same day, 31 August 1939, on Hendeson's orders, Ogilive-Forbes took Dahlerus to meet Jozef Lipski, the Polish ambassador to Germany, to show him his peace plan. The meeting went poorly with Lipski objecting to the Germanophile Dahlerus's rant against Poland as Dahelerus accused the Poles of being the instigators of the Danzig crisis by refusing to allow the Free City of Danzig to rejoin Germany and in addition to demanding that the Polish Corridor return to Germany as well. Finally "to stop this ghastly business" as he called it, Lipski claimed to not to understand Dahlerus's German and sent off to dictate his peace plan to his secretary. After Dahlerus left the room, Lipski turned to Ogilive-Forbes, and expressed great anger at British policy, saying that as a Pole, he did not want to be harangued by some Swedish amateur diplomat whom he had never heard of before; he definitely would not agree to hand over parts of Poland at the urging of this amateur diplomat; and finally he stated he found it astonishing that the British were really taking Dahlerus seriously. Lipski expressed his belief that the best way of stopping the Danzig crisis from turning into a war was an "united front" of Britain, France and Poland to deter Germany, and the British should not be talking to somebody like Dahlerus, who clearly was an amateur diplomat operating way beyond his level of competence. Ogilvie-Forbes agreed with Lipski that Henderson should not had been talking to Dahlerus, but Ogilive-Forbes was as the historian D.C. Watt called him a "dyed-in-the-wool professional diplomat", indeed so professional that he did not criticise his chief in front of a foreign diplomat.

On the morning of 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland, and Henderson sent Ogilive-Forbes to hear Hitler give his speech before the _Reichstag_ claiming that it was Poland that just attacked Germany. On the morning of 3 September 1939, at about 7:43 am, Ogilive-Forbes made a phone call to Dahlerus that once again was listened into by the _Forschungsamat_ saying that: "Henderson would be going over at 9 am and would request a reply by 11 am; if that was not forthcoming, they would ask for their passports and all would be over". Dahlerus, who was still convinced as late as the morning of 3 September 1939 that he could stop World War II, phoned Ogilive-Forbes at about 10:30 am, asking the British to give more time to their ultimatum that Henderson had submitted to Hitler that morning, saying he had a plan to have Göring fly to London where he would prevent the German-Polish war that began two days before from becoming a world war. Ogilive-Forbes, who knew that Britain would be at war with Germany in half a hour's time, as the ultimatum was set to expire at 11 am, in an attempt to politely brush off Dahlerus told him that Britain would consider his plan, but required proof that Germany was acting in complete sincerity. Ogilive-Forbes then put Dahlerus on the phone to Lord Halifax at 10:50 am. Lord Halifax in turn told Dahlerus that if Germany wanted to prevent a world war, all the _Reich_ had to do was agree to the British ultimatum to cease the war against Poland at once, and since Hitler had no intention of doing that, he was just wasting his time with his latest peace plan. At 11 am, the ultimatum expired, and King George VI went on the BBC to announce that Britain was now at war with Germany.


Later diplomatic career

After leaving Berlin soon after the outbreak of war, Ogilvie-Forbes was sent as Counsellor to the British Embassy in Norway, but had to leave almost immediately in company with the ambassador and the royal family when the Germans invaded. From 1940–1944 he was Minister to Cuba[9] and then from 1944–1949 Ambassador to Venezuela.[10]


Retirement and death

On retirement Ogilvie-Forbes farmed his estate of Boyndlie, Aberdeenshire, was appointed a Deputy Lieutenant for Aberdeenshire, and became actively involved in various local charities and cultural organisations. He was a member of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry and the Catholic Council of Great Britain. For a short time he supported the Scottish Nationalist Party and was then designated by the 4th Scottish National Assembly to negotiate with the UK Government on the principle of self-government for Scotland under the Scottish Covenant Association Scheme of 1950. He died of a heart attack in 1954 at the age of 63.


Family

Ogilvie-Forbes married Clare Louise Hunter in 1921 and had two children, Lt Colonel Thomas Drostan Ogilvie-Forbes, Royal Engineers, who died in 1946 at the age of 24, and Christine Mary Margaret Ogilvie-Forbes (Mrs. Brose) who worked in Hut 8, Bletchley Park (1939–1945). One of his half-brothers, Air Vice Marshall Neill Ogilvie-Forbes OBE was Assistant Chief of Air Staff (Intelligence) 1950–52 and a half-sister Marion Wilberforce was one of the first eight women pilots to join the ATA in January 1940.


References

Bibliography

-   -   -   -   -   -

Category:1890 births Category:1954 deaths Category:British diplomats Category:Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire Category:Ogilvie Forbes family

[1] _London Gazette_, 11 May 1937, p.3082

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] _London Gazette_, 23 April 1919, p. 327

[6]

[7]

[8] _The Times_, 11 May 1937, p.12

[9] _London Gazette_,16 April 1940,p.2241

[10] _London Gazette_, 6 October 1944, p.4591