GREGORY ARESHIAN (13 May 1949) is an Armenian-American archeologist and historian who is a professor at American University of Armenia. He was the co-director of the international team of archeologists who, led by Boris Gasparyan, found the 5,500 years old shoe in and the oldest winery in Areni,[1] of which Areshian said:

  For the first time, we have a complete archaeological picture of wine production dating back 6,100 years.[2]

Gregory Areshian taught in 14 US universities and colleges including University of California, Los Angeles, University of California, Irvine, University of Chicago, University of Wisconsin, Platteville, Amherst College. He is the author of more than 150 scholarly works published in 5 languages in 12 countries, mostly devoted to interdisciplinary studies in social sciences and the humanities with a special focus on the Middle East and Armenia in a broader historical context.


Education

Gregory Areshian received his bachelor's and master's degree from Yerevan State University where he studied from 1966 to 1973. From 1973 until 1975 Gregory Areshian pursued his PhD studies at the Saint Petersburg State University under the supervision of Boris Piotrovsky. His thesis was "Iron in Ancient Western Asia".

Gregory Areshian knows 9 languages; English, Russian, Armenian, German, French, Latin, Turkish, Grabar and Urartian cuneiform.


Festschrift

In 2017 a Festschrift was published in honor of Gregory Areshian under the title_Bridging Times and Spaces: Papers in Ancient Near Eastern, Mediterranean and Armenian Studies._ The editors of the volume were Pavel Avetisyan, a former student of Gregory Areshian and Yervand Grekyan.[3]


Bibliography

Books

-   2013 Empires and Diversity: On the Crossroads of Archaeology, History, and Anthropology. Ideas, Debates, and Perspectives, 7, Los Angeles: Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press, University of California, 256 pages + ill (Editor and contributing author).
-   1996 Haykakan čartarapetutyan patmut’yun, Hator A (History of Armenian Architecture, Vol. I: The Architecture of Armenian Highlands from the Earliest Times to the 3rd Century AD). Co-authored with K.K. Ghafadaryan, K. L. Hovhannisian, and A.A. Sahinian, Yerevan: HH GAA “Gitut’yun” Hratarakchut’yun (“Gitut’yun” Press of the Armenian National Academy of Sciences, Pp. 298 + pl. 48.
-   1993 Hnagitakan ashkhatank'nerǝ Hayastani norakaŕuytsnerum,1986-1987 t't' peghumneri ardyunk'nerǝ (Archaeological Investigations of Construction Development Sites in Armenia, Excavations Reports for 1986-87), Vol. 1. Co-edited with G.A. Tiratsian and A.A. Kalantarian, Yerevan: Publishing House of the Armenian Academy of Sciences, Pp. 171+ pl. 190.
-   1992 Editor of Hayastani hnagitut'yun, h. 1: K'ari Dar - Ush Bronzi Dar (Archaeology of Armenia, vol. 1: From the Stone Age through the Late Bronze Age), by S.A. Yesayan, Yerevan: Yerevan University Press.
-   1990 Mezhdistsiplinarnye issledovanija kul’turogeneza i etnogeneza Armjanskogo nagor’ja i sopredel’nykh oblastej, Sbornik dokladov (Interdisciplinary Studies of Cultural and Ethnic Processes in the Armenian Highland and Adjacent Regions, A Collection of Papers). Co-edited with S.A. Yesayan, Yerevan: Izdatel’stvo Erevanskogo Universiteta (Yerevan University Press), Pp. 294.

Journal Articles

-   2016 Ani: Identities and Conflicts in and around a “Silk Road” City. In: H.A. Haviland, H.E.L. Prins, D. Walrath, and B. McBride, The Essence of Anthropology, 4th edition, Boston, Mass.: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning, 136-ff.
-   2015 Areni (Armenia). In: K.B. Metheny and M. C. Beaudry (eds.), Archaeology of Food, An Encyclopedia, vol. 1, Lanham-Boulder-New York-London: Rowman&Littlefield, 40.
-   2015 Wineries (Co-author: H. Barnard). In: K.B. Metheny and M. C. Beaudry (eds.), Archaeology of Food, An Encyclopedia, vol. 2, Lanham-Boulder-New York-London: Rowman&Littlefield, 551-52.
-   2014 Preliminary Results of the 2012 Excavations at the Late Neolithic Settlement of Masis Blur (Co-authors: A. Hayrapetyan, K. Martirosyan-Olshansky, and P. Avetisyan). In: B. Gasparyan and M. Arimura (eds.), Stone Age of Armenia: A Guidebook to the Stone Age Archaeology in the Republic of Armenia. Kanazawa (Japan): Kanazawa University, 177-190.
-   2014 Weaving the Ancient Past: Chalcolithic Basket and Textile Technology at the Areni-1 Cave, Armenia (Co-authors: L. Stapleton, L. Margaryan, R. Pinhasi, and B. Gasparyan). In: B. Gasparyan and M. Arimura (eds.), Stone Age of Armenia: A Guidebook to the Stone Age Archaeology in the Republic of Armenia. Kanazawa (Japan): Kanazawa University, 219-232.
-   2013 The Age of Maturity. Backdirt 2013, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 4-5.
-   2013 A World of Archaeology: An Interview with Colin Renfrew on the Occasion of the 40th Anniversary of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology (With Brett Kaufman), Backdirt 2013, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 32-45.
-   2013 Masis Blur: A Late Neolithic Settlement in the Plain of Ararat, Armenia (Co-authors: K. Martirosyan-Olshansky, P.S. Avetisyan, and A. Hayrapetyan). Backdirt 2013, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 142-146.
-   2013 Introduction: Variability and Complexity in Multidisciplinary and Interdisciplinary Studies of Empires. In G. E. Areshian (ed.), Empires and Diversity: On the Crossroads of Archaeology, History, and Anthropology. Ideas, Debates, and Perspectives, 7, Los Angeles: Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press, University of California, 1-20.
-   2013 Sasanian Imperialism and the Shaping of Armenian Identity: Interdisciplinary Verification and Ambivalence of Empire-Nation Relationship. In G. E. Areshian (ed.), Empires and Diversity: On the Crossroads of Archaeology, History, and Anthropology. Ideas, Debates, and Perspectives, 7, Los Angeles: Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press, University of California, 146-163.
-   2012 Neolithic and Chalcolithic (Aeneolithic) periods in Armenia. In H. Simonyan (ed.), Archaeological Heritage of Armenia. Yerevan: Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Armenia, 8-12.
-   2012 How Archaeology is made: The Backdirt perspective. Backdirt 2012, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 5.
-   2012 Wine and Death: The 2010 excavation season at the Areni-1 cave complex, Armenia (Co-authors: B. Gasparyan, K. Martirosyan-Olshansky, L. Stapleton, D. Zardarian). Backdirt 2011, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 65-70.
-   2012 Backdirt: A Continuing Evolution. Backdirt 2011, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 4-5.
-   2012 The Chalcolithic of the Near East and southeastern Europe: discoveries and new perspectives from the cave complex Areni-1, Armenia (Co-authors: B. Gasparyan, P. Avetisyan, R. Pinhasi, K. Wilkinson, A. Smith, R. Hovsepyan, D. Zardaryan). Antiquity 86, (no. 331):115-130.
-   2012 Areni-1 Cave, Armenia: A Chalcolithic—Early Bronze Age settlement and ritual site in the southern Caucasus (Co-authors: K. Wilkinson, B. Gasparyan, R. Pinhasi, P. Avetisyan, R. Hovsepyan, D. Zardaryan, G. Bar-Oz, A. Smith,). Journal of Field Archaeology, vol. 37 (no. 1):20-33.
-   2011 Chemical evidence for wine production around 4000 BCE in the Late Chalcolithic Near Eastern highlands (Co-authors: H. Barnard, A.N. Dooley, B. Gasparyan, K.F. Faull). Journal of Archaeological Science, 38:977-984.
-   2010 Why We Do Need to Study Leonti Mroveli. Aramazd, Armenian Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 5(no.1):17-26.
-   2010 First Direct Evidence of Chalcolithic Footwear from the Near Eastern Highlands (Co-authors: R. Pinhasi, B. Gasparian, D. Zardaryan, A. Smith, G. Bar-Oz, T. Higham). PLoS ONE, 5(6): e10984, 1-5.
-   2009 Empires of Diversity. Backdirt, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 84-91.
-   2008 Die Beziehungen der Kulturen des Armenischen Hochlands und der Zentralgebiete Südkaukasiens zu Vorderasien und der Ägäis in der Trialeti-Epoche. Aramazd, Armenian Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 3(no.2):51-90.
-   2008 B.B. Piotrovsky and Armenia: Reminiscences of a Disciple. Aramazd, Armenian Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 3(no.1):140-153.
-   2008 B.B. Piotrovsky i Armenia: Portret pamjati (B.B. Piotrovsky and Armenia: A Portrait of Memory). In: U podnozhija Ararata, Katalog vystavki (At the Foot of Ararat, Exhibition Catalogue, St. Petersburg: The State Hermitage Publishers, 8-19.
-   2008 Returning to a Great Excavation of the Past: A New Joint Project in Armenia. (Co author Aram A. Kalantarian), Backdirt, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 50-59.
-   2007 From Extended Families to Incipient Polities: The Trajectory of Social Complexity in the Early Bronze Age of the Ararat Plain (Central Near Eastern Highlands). In L.M. Popova, C.W. Hartley, and A.T. Smith (eds.) Social Orders and Social Landscapes: Proceedings of the 2005 University of Chicago Conference on Eurasian Archaeology. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 26-54.
-   2007 High above Mesopotamia: An Archaeological Summer in the Central Near Eastern Highlands. Backdirt, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 28 – 31.
-   2006 Early Bronze Age Settlements in the Ararat Plain and its Vicinity. Archäologische Mitteilungen aus Iran und Turan. Vol. 37 (2005):71 – 88.
-   2006 Cyclopes from the Land of the Eagle: Anatolian Background of Odyssey 9 and of the Greek Myths Concerning the Cyclopes. In K. Jones-Bley, M.E. Huld, A. Della Volpe, and M.R. Dexter (eds.) Proceedings of the 17th Annual UCLA Indo-European Conference (Journal of Indo-European Studies Monograph Series 52). Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man, 31 – 50.
-   2006 Sequences of Signs: Eurasian Archaeology from a Perspective of Cultural Semiotics. In D.L. Peterson, L.M. Popova, and A.T. Smith (eds.) Beyond the Steppe and the Sown. Proceedings of the 2002 University of Chicago Conference on Eurasian Archaeology (Colloquia Pontica 13, Monograph Supplement of Ancient West and East). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 282 – 295.
-   2004 Herakles, the Sun-God-Archer, Týr, and Kerberos. In K. Jones-Bley, M.E. Huld, A. Della Volpe, and M.R. Dexter (eds.) Proceedings of the 15th Annual UCLA Indo-European Conference (Journal of Indo-European Studies Monograph Series 49), Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man, 45 – 73.
-   2003 The Zoomorphic Code of the Proto-Indo-European Mythological Cycle of “Birth-Death-Resurrection”: A Linguistic-Archaeological Reconstruction. In K. Jones-Bley, M.E. Huld, A. Della Volpe, and M.R. Dexter (eds.) Proceedings of the 14th Annual UCLA Indo-European Conference (Journal of Indo-European Studies Monograph Series 47), Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man, 228 – 249.
-   1995 Democratic Society or Efficient State? A Continuing Armenian Dilemma. Armenian Review 46, No. 1 – 4/181 – 184 (1993): 203 – 215.
-   1992 Armenian and Indo-European Cosmogonic Myths and their Development. In J.A.C. Greppin (ed.), Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Armenian Linguistics, Delmar, New York: Caravan Books, 1 – 36.
-   1992 Arkheologija i istoricheskij sintez (Nasledie B.B. Piotrovskogo v oblasti urartovedenija, kavkazovedenija i armenovedenija) (Archaeology and Historical Synthesis: B.B. Piotrovskiï's Legacy in Urartian, Caucasian, and Armenian Studies). Vestnik Drevnej Istorii (Journal of Ancient History), No. 4 (203):16 – 27.
-   1991 Sootnoshenie tipov khozjajstva i razvitie kul’tur v rannem i srednem bronzovom veke Armjanskogo Nagor’ja i Juzhnogo Kavkaza (Correlations between the Types of Economy and Cultural Development in the Early and Middle Bronze Age of the Armenian Highland and Southern Caucasus). In Ju. V. Bromlej (ed.), Mirovaja kul’tura: traditsii i sovremennost’ (World Culture: Traditions and Nowadays). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 75 – 83.
-   1991 Kul’tura i operatsional’nye ierarkhicheskie struktury arkheologicheskikh istochnikov (Culture and the Operational Hierarchical Structures in Archaeological Sources). In V. M. Masson, V.N. Borjaz, M.V. Anikovich (eds.), Arkheologicheskie kul’tury i kul’turnaja transformatsija, Arkheologicheskie izyskanija, no. 1 (Archaeological Cultures and Cultural Transformation, Archaeological Investigations 1). Leningrad: Institut Arkheologii AN SSSR (Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union), 93 – 99.
-   1991 Aruči dambanateghi No. 5 dambaranə (Tomb 5 of Aruč Funerary Site), (with G.S. Tumanyan). In Hayastani Hanrapetut’yunum dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1989 – 1990 (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1989 – 1990). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia, 24 – 26.
-   1991 Adabluri peghumnerə (Excavations at Adablur). In Hayastani Hanrapetut’yunum dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1989 – 1990 (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1989 – 1990). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia, 8 – 11.
-   1991 Ushashelyan norahayt hnavayr Aparani shrjanum (A Late Acheulean Site Recently Discovered in the Aparan Region). In Hayastani Hanrapetut’yunum dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1989 – 1990 (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1989 – 1990). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia, 4 – 5.
-   1990 K issledovaniju obschikh zakonomernostey osvoenija prirodnykh resursov drevnimi kul’turami (Toward a Study of General Regularities in the Exploitation of Natural Resources by Ancient Cultures). In S.A. Yesayan and G. E. Areshian (eds.) Mezhdistsiplinarnye issledovanija kul’turogeneza i etnogeneza Armjanskogo nagor’ja i sopredel’nykh oblastej, Sbornik dokladov (Interdisciplinary Studies of Cultural and Ethnic Processes in the Armenian Highland and Adjacent Regions, A Collection of Papers). Yerevan: Izdatel’stvo Erevanskogo Universiteta (Yerevan University Press), 59 – 65.
-   1990 Les éleveurs non sédentaires et les civilisations agricoles à l’Age du Bronze sur le Plateau Arménien et au Caucase méridional. In H.- P. Francfort (ed.), Nomades et sédentaires en Asie Centrale (Apports de l’archéologie et de l’ethnologie). Paris: Éditions du CNRS, 19-25.
-   1990 Hnagitut’yunə ev Urartu – Hayastan problemə (Archaeology and the Question of Affinities between Urartu and Armenia). With G.A. Tiratsyan, HGA Patma-banasirakan Handes (Journal of History and Philology), no. 3:70-75.
-   1990 Further Thoughts on the Uruk Expansion. Current Anthropology 31:396-399.
-   1990 Konets srednego bronzovogo veka v mezhdurech’e Araksa i Kury (The End of the Middle Bronze Age between the Araxes and Kura Rivers.). With V.E. Oganesyan, F.M. Muradyan, P.S. Avetisyan, and L.A. Petrosyan. Istoriko-filologicheskiï zhurnal AN Arm. SSR (Journal of History and Philology), no. 1:53-74.
-   1989 Rol’ neosedlykh skotovodov v razvitii tsivilizatsiï Evrazii (The Role of Mobile Pastoralists in the Development of Eurasian Civilizations). In Vzaimodeïstvie kochevykh kul’tur i drevnikh tsivilizatsiï (Interaction between Nomadic Cultures and Ancient Civilizations). Alma-Ata: “Nauka” Kazakhskoï SSR, 21 – 24.
-   1989 T’rialet’yan mshakut’ayin darashrjanə (sekventsiyan) ev nra zhamanakagrakan dirk’ə (The Trialeti Cultural Sequence and its Chronological Place). In Haykakan SSH-um dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1987 – 1988 (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1987 – 1988). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia, 17 – 19.
-   1989 Joghazi hushardzanakhmbi hnagitakan usumnasirut’yunnerə, 1987 (Archaeological Investigations of the Multicomponent Site at Joghaz). With H. Ye. Simonyan, In Haykakan SSH-um dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1987 – 1988 (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1987 – 1988). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia, 5 – 7.
-   1989 Etapy urbanizatsii na Armjanskom nagor’e (The Stages of Urbanization in the Armenian Highlands). In Zony i etapy urbanizatsii (Zones and Stages of Urbanization). Tashkent: “Fan” Press, 41 – 43.
-   1989 K obosnovaniju metodov issledovanija kul’turnykh i etnicheskikh kontaktov v drevnosti (Substantiating the Methods of Studying Ancient Ethnic and Cultural Contacts). Sovetskaja Etnografija (Soviet Ethnography), no. 2:45 – 55.
-   1988 Éléments indoeuropéens dans la mythologie du Plateau Armenien et du Caucase du Sud au IIe mil. Av J.-C. In P. Vavroušek and V. Souček (eds.), Šulmu: Papers on the Ancient Near East. Prague: Charles University Press, 19 – 37.
-   1988 Indoevropejskij sjuzhet v mifologii naselenija mezhdurech’ja Kury i Araksa II tysjacheletija do n.e. (An Indo-European Motif in the Second Millennium BC Mythology of the Population that Occupied the Territory between the Kura and Araxes Rivers). Vestnik Drevnej Istorii (Journal of Ancient History), no. 4(187):84 – 102.
-   1988 Raboty v Idzhevanskom rajone (Works in the Ijevan Region). With H. Ye. Simonyan. In V. P. Shilov (ed.), Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1986 g. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1986). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 469.
-   1987 Osvoenie bronzy i zheleza na Blizhnem Vostoke i v sopredel’nykh oblastjakh – voprosy sravnitel’no-istoricheskogo analiza (The Growth of Bronze and Iron Technologies in the Near East and Adjacent Regions: Issues of Comparative-Historical Analysis). In Tekhnologicheskij i kul’turnyj progress v rannezemledel’cheskuju epokhu (Technological and Cultural Progress During the Period of Early Farming). Ashgabat, 7 – 9.
-   1987 Hnagitut’yan zargatsumə Sovetakan Hayastanum (The Development of Archaeology in Soviet Armenia). Banber Erevani Hamalsarani, Hasarakakan gitut’yunner (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 3(63):108 – 120.
-   1987 Hnaguyn zhamanakashrjani čartarapetut’yunə (The Architecture of Earliest Epochs). In “Sovetakan Hayastan,” Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia, Supplementary Volume “Soviet Armenia”). Yerevan, 518.
-   1987 Nakhnadaryan-hamaynakan hasarakargə (Primitive Society). In “Sovetakan Hayastan,” Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia, Supplementary Volume “Soviet Armenia”). Yerevan, 88 – 90, pl. II.
-   1987 Maisjanskie kurgany (The Maisian Barrows). In V. P. Shilov (ed.), Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1985 g. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1985). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 558 – 559.
-   1987 K interpretatsii semantiki bronzovoj skul’ptury Lchashena i Lori-berda (Toward an Interpretation of the Semantics of Bronze Sculptures from Lchashen and Lori-Berd). In VI respublikanskaja nauchnaja konferentsija po problemam kul’tury i iskusstva Armenii (The 6th National Scientific Conference Devoted to the Study of the Culture and Art of Armenia). Yerevan, 80 – 81.
-   1987 T’reghk’i “K’orukht’ash” dambanabluri gavat’i patkerayin kompozitsiayi meknabanman p’ordz (A Case for the Interpretation of the Pictorial Composition of the Goblet from the Trialeti “Korukhtash” Barrow). In Hanrapetakan gitakan nstashrjan nvirvac 1984 – 1985 t.t. azgagrakan ev banagitakan dashtayin hetazotut’yunneri ardyunk’nerin (National Scientific Conference Devoted to the Results of Ethnographic and Folkloric Fieldwork in 1984 – 1985). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 11-13.
-   1987 Joghazi norahayt dambarannerə (The New-Found Tombs at Joghaz). With H. Ye. Simonyan and S. E. Gasparyan. In Haykakan SSH-um dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1985 – 1986 (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1985 – 1986). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 6 – 8.
-   1986 Raskopki v Maisjane (Excavations at Maisian). In V. P. Shilov (ed.) Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1984 goda. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1984). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 427 – 428.
-   1985 Hnagitakan hetazotut’yunneri laboratoriayi 1984 t’. dashtayin ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerits (Some Results of the 1984 Fieldwork of the Laboratory of Archaeological Investigations). With E. Asatryan and H. Ohanyan. Erevani Hamalsaran, Lratu (Bulletin of the Yerevan University), no. 2:14 – 16.
-   1985 Hayagitakan kentroni 1979 – 1983 t’.t.’ dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’nerə (Archaeological Fieldwork of the Center for Armenian Studies, 1979 – 1983). With E. Asatryan. In Banber Erevani Hamalsarani, Hasarakakan gitut’yunner (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 3(57):202 – 210.
-   1985 Otrazhenie indoevropejskoj mifologii v pamjatnikakh iskusstva Vostochnoj Armenii srednego i pozdnego bronzovogo veka (Reflections of Indo-European Mythology in Middle and Late Bronze Age Art of Eastern Armenia). In IV mezhdunarodnyj simpozium po armjanskomu iskusstvu (The Fourth International Symposium on Armenian Art). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 24 – 26.
-   1985 Okhrannye raskopki v Maisjane (Rescue Excavations at Maisian). In R. M. Munchaev (ed.), Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1983 goda. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1983). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 494 – 495.
-   1985 Novonajdennoe kurgannoe pole u juzhnogo podnozh’ja gory Aragats (A New-Found Kurgan Field in the Southern Foothills of Mt. Aragats). In Vsesojuznaja arkheologicheskaja konferentsija “Dostizhenija sovetskoj arkheologii v XI pjatiletke” (“The Achievements of Soviet Archaeology during the Eleventh Five-Year Period,” The All-Union Archaeological Conference). Baku: “Elm” Press, 63 – 65.
-   1985 Shamirami hushardzanakhmbi sistematik peghumneri tasnamyakə (A Decade of Systematic Excavations at the Shamiram Archaeological Complex). In Haykakan SSH-um dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1983 – 1984 (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1983 – 1984). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 13 – 15.
-   1983 Redkin-Lager. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 9, Yerevan, 619.
-   1983 Jeyt’unyan mshakuytə (The Jeytun Culture). In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 9, Yerevan, 485.
-   1983 Jarmo. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 9, Yerevan, 478 – 479.
-   1983 Raskopki Bol’shikh Shamiramskikh kurganov (Excavations of the Big Kurgans at Shamiram). In B. A. Rybakov (ed.), Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1981 goda. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1981). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 425 – 426.
-   1983 Hnagitakan aghbyurnerum mshakut’ayin ev et’nikakan p’okhazdetsut’yunneri artatsolman problemə (The Problem of Reflection of Cultural and Ethnic Interactions in Archaeological Sources). In Haykakan SSH-um dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1981 – 1982 t’t’ (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1981 – 1982). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 6 – 8.
-   1982 Çayönü Tepesi. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 8, Yerevan, 666 – 667.
-   1982 Çatal Höyük. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 8, Yerevan, 659.
-   1982 Shertagrut’yun hnagitakan (Archaeological Stratigraphy). In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 8, Yerevan, 488.
-   1982 Shanidar. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 8, Yerevan, 449 – 450.
-   1982 Shamiram. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 8, Yerevan, 441 – 442.
-   1982 Neolit’ (The Neolithic). With S. Sardaryan. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 8, Yerevan, 226 – 227.
-   1982 Nazrvan. With S. Hovannisyan. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 8, Yerevan, 145.
-   1982 K probleme otnositel’noj nezavisimosti razvitija kul’tury i sotsial’noj organizatsii. (Po materialam Bronzovogo veka Armjanskogo nagor’ja i Juzhnogo Kavkaza) (The Issue of Relative Independence in the Development of Culture and Social Organization According to the Bronze Age Evidence from the Armenian Highland and Southern Caucasus). In V. M. Masson and Ė. V. Khanzadyan (eds.) Kul’turnyj progress v ėpokhu bronzy i rannego zheleza (The Progress of Culture during the Bronze and Early Iron Ages). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 13 – 16.
-   1982 Sovremennoe sostojanie izuchenija arkhitektury Shengavitskoj arkheologicheskoj kul’tury (Kuro – araksskaja kul’turnaja oblast’) (The Current State of Studies of the Architecture of the Shengavit’ Archaeological Culture (Kura-Araxes Horizon). In V respublikanskaja nauchnaja konferentsija po problemam kul’tury i iskusstva Armenii (The 5th National Scientific Conference Devoted to the Study of the Culture and Art of Armenia). Yerevan, 19 – 21, 256 – 258.
-   1982 Obobshchestvlenie drevnostej (The Incorporation of Antiquities in Contemporary Society). Banber Erevani Hamalsarani, Hasarakakan gitut’yunner (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 2:72 – 78.
-   1982 On the Problem of Cultural and Ethnic Interaction of Europe with Armenian Highland and Adjacent Regions in Antiquity. In Problems of the European Ethnography and Folklore (2nd Congress of the International Society for European Ethnology and Folklore, USSR, Suzdal’). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 132 – 135.
-   1982 Hayastanum mec əntanik’i aŕajatsman khndirə hnagitakan nor tvyalneri lusabanmamb (The Problem of Origins of Extended Family in Armenia in the Light of Recent Archaeological Evidence). In Haykakan SSH GA Hnagitut’yan ev Azgagrut’yan Instituti gitakan nstashrjan nvirvac SSHM kazmavorman 60-amyakin (The Scientific Session of the Institute of Archaeology and Ethnography of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR Dedicated to the 60th Anniversary of the Formation of the USSR). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 5 – 7.
-   1981 Istoriko-materialisticheskaja kontseptsija obshchestvennogo razdelenija truda I nekotorye dannye arkheologii (The Historical-Materialistic Concept of the Social Division of Labor and Some Archaeological Data). In Marksistsko-leninskaja filosofija i voprosy metodologii istorii i arkheologii (The Marxist–Leninist Philosophy and Methodological Issues in History and Archaeology). Ashgabat, 143 – 146.
-   1981 Kura-Araxes Art. In Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Armenian Art. Vol. 1, Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 88 – 97 (Reprint of the 1978 English and Russian separatum edition).
-   1981 Mokhrablur. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 7, Yerevan, 693.
-   1981 Mshakuyt’ hnagitakan (Archaeological Culture). In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 7, Yerevan, 657.
-   1981 Menuayi Jrantsk’ (The Menua Canal). In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 7, Yerevan, 464 – 465.
-   1981 Malak’lu. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 7, Yerevan, 153.
-   1981 Kul’turnyj traditsionalizm na primere kuro-araksskoj kul’tury (Cultural Traditionalism Exemplified by the Kura-Araxes Culture). In metodologicheskogo seminara Leningradskogo Otdelenija Instituta Arkheologii (Proceedings of the Methodological Seminar at the Leningrad Division of the Institute of Archaeology). Leningrad: “Nauka” Press, 49 – 52.
-   1981 Hushardzanneri peghumner Norabats ev Nerk’in Charbakh gyugheri mijev (Excavations of Sites between Norabats and Nerk’in Charbakh Villages). With S.H. Devejian and H. Ŕ. Israyelyan, in Haykakan SSH-um dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1979 – 1980 t’t’ (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1979 – 1980). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 25 – 27.
-   1981 Pahpanakan peghumner K’anageghi dambaranadashtum (Rescue Excavations at the K’anagegh Burial Field). In Haykakan SSH-um dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac gitakan nstashrjan, 1979 – 1980 t’t’ (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1979 – 1980). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 2 – 4.
-   1980 Hnagitut’yun (Archaeology). In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 6, Yerevan, 460 – 461.
-   1980 K’ur-arak’syan mshakuyt’ (The Kura – Araxes Culture). In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 6, Yerevan, 26 – 27.
-   1980 Ėlementy religioznykh predstavlenij ėpokhi zarozhdenija gorodskoj tsivilizatsii (po materialam kuro-araksskoj kul’tury) (Elements of Religious Concepts from the Times of Emergence of Urban Civilization (Exemplified by the Evidence from the Kura-Araxes Culture). In B.A. Rybakov (ed.) Ideologicheskie predstavlenija drevnejshikh obshchestv (Ideological Concepts of Earliest Societies). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 53 – 58.
-   1980 Norabats – novyj pamjatnik ėpokhi bronzy (Norabats – a New-found Site of the Bronze Age). In B. A. Rybakov (ed.), Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1979 goda. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1979). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 423.
-   1980 Kul’turno-istoricheskoe ob’’jasnenie v arkheologii (The Culture-historical Explanation in Archaeology). In V.M. Masson (ed.), Metodika arkheologicheskogo issledovanija i zakonomernosti razvitija drevnikh obshchestv (Methods of Archaeological Research and Regularities of Development of Ancient Societies). Ashgabat, 12 – 13.
-   1980 O sootnoshenii issledovanija s okhranoj, vosstanovleniem i ispol’zovaniem arkheologicheskikh pamjatnikov (The Relationship of the Study of Archaeological Sites with their Protection, Restoration, and Management). In Problemy okhrany pamjatnikov arkheologii v naselennykh mestakh. Materialy Vsesojuznoj Konferentsii (Issues of Protection of Archaeological Sites in Contemporary Urban Environment, Proceedings of a National Conference), Yerevan: Yerevan University Press, 32 – 35.
-   1979 Kurgany Arucha (The Barrows at Aruch). In B. A. Rybakov (ed.) Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1978 goda. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1978). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 518 – 519.
-   1979 Hayagitakan kentroni 1977 – 1978 t’.t’. dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’nerə, (Archaeological Fieldwork of the Center for Armenian Studies, 1977 – 1978). With H. Simonyan, G. Sargsyan, G. Kocharian, and H. Ohanyan, Banber Erevani Hamalsarani, Hasarakakan gitut’yunner (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 2(38):205 – 224.
-   1979 Nekotorye voprosy istorii arkhitektury drevnezemledel’cheskikh kul’tur Armjanskogo hagor’ja i Juzhnogo Kavkaza (Several Questions Concerning the History of Architecture of the Early Farming Cultures of the Armenian Highland and Southern Caucasus). With K.K. Ghafadarian, in IV respublikanskaja nauchnaja konferentsija po problemam kul’tury i iskusstva Armenii (The 4th National Scientific Conference Devoted to the Study of the Culture and Art of Armenia). Yerevan, 14 – 16, 160 – 162.
-   1979 Nor nyut’er Hayastani m.t’.a. 3-rd hazaramyaki erkragorcakan tekhnikakan kulturaneri masin’ (New Evidence Concerning the Usage of Agricultural Plants in Crafts of the 3rd millennium BC in Armenia). In B. N. Arakelian (ed.) Haykakan SSH-um 1977-1978 t’t’. dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac zekutsumneri t’ezisner. (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1977 – 1978). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 12-14.
-   1978 Trialeti. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 4, Yerevan, 227.
-   1978 T’ghit’. In Haykakan Sovetakan Hanragitaran (The Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), vol. 4, Yerevan, 192.
-   1978 Voprosy tipologii naselennykh punktov Armenii pozdnego bronzovogo I rannego zheleznogo vekov (The Typology of Late Bronze and Early Iron Age Settlements in Armenia) Gosudarstvennyj muzej iskusstva narodov Vostoka, Nauchnye soobshchenija (Scientific Reports of the National Museum of Oriental Art), Vol. 10, Moscow, 91 – 108.
-   1978 Issledovanija v Shamirame (Explorations at Shamiram). In B. A. Rybakov (ed.), Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1977 goda. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1977). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 503 – 505.
-   1978 Izuchenie stratigrafii Mokhrablura (The Stratigraphy of Mokhrablur). In B.A. Rybakov (ed.), Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1977 goda. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1977). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 503 – 505.
-   1978 Kul’turno-istoricheskij podkhod k izucheniju ėtnicheskikh obshchnostej v arkheologii (The Cultural-historical Approach Toward the Study of Ethnic Entities in Archaeology). In Ė. S. Markarian (ed.), Metodologicheskie problemy issledovanija ėtnicheskikh kul’tur, simpoziuma (Methodological Problems of Studies in Ethnic Cultures, Proceedings of a Symposium). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 33 – 41.
-   1977 Hayagitakan kentroni 1976 t’vakani dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’nerə (Archaeological Fieldwork of the Center for Armenian Studies, 1976). With H. Simonyan and G. Sargsyan. Banber Erevani Hamalsarani, Hasarakakan gitut’yunner (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 3:266 – 274.
-   1977 Rannij gorod kak spetsificheskaja forma sotsiokul’turnoj organizatsii (The Early City as a Specific Form of Sociocultural Organization). In: Drevnie goroda, Vsesojuznoj konferentsii “Kul’tura Srednej Azii i Kazakhstana v ėpokhu rannego srednevekov’ja,” Pendzhikent 1977 (“Ancient Cities,” Materials for the National Conference “The Culture of Central Asia and Kazakhstan in the Early Middle Ages,” Pendzhikent 1977). Leningrad, “Nauka” Press, 15 – 16.
-   1977 1975 – 1976 t’.t’. Shamirami hushardzanakhmbi usumnasirut’yan nakhnakan ardyunk’nerə (Preliminary Results of the Study of the Multicomponent Site at Shamiram, 1975 – 1976). In B. N. Arakelian (ed.) Haykakan SSH-um 1975-1976 t’t’. dashtayin hnagitakan ashkhatank’neri ardyunk’nerin nvirvac zekutsumneri t’ezisner. (Concise Reports of the Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1975 – 1976). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 12-14.
-   1977 Die frühe Klassengesellschaft im nord-östlichen Armenischen Hochland. Jahrbuch für Wirtschaftsgeshichte, no. 1:97 – 108.
-   1977 Hnagitakan hetazotut’yunner Haykakan SSH Ashtaraki ev Nairii shrjannerum (Archaeological Survey in the Ashtarak and Nairi Regions of Armenia). With K. Ghafadarian, H. Simonyan, G. Tiratsian, and A. Kalantarian). Haykakan SSH GA Lraber hasarakakan gitut’yunneri (The Journal of Social Sciences of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia), no. 4:77 – 93.
-   1977 Arkhitektura pogrebal’nykh sooruzhenij Glavnogo nekropolja Shamirama (The Architecture of the Funerary Structures of the Main Necropolis at Shamiram). With S. S. Hakopyan, in III respublikanskaja nauchnaja konferentsija po problemam kul’tury i iskusstva Armenii (The 3rd National Scientific Conference Devoted to the Study of the Culture and Art of Armenia). Yerevan, 98 – 99.
-   1976 Arkheologija v sisteme dialektiko-materialisticheskoj klassifikatsii nauk (Archaeology in a System of Dialectic-Materialistic Classification of Sciences). In B.A. Rybakov (ed.), Istorizm arkheologii: metodologicheskie problemy (The Historicism of Archaeology: Methodological Problems). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 37 – 38.
-   1976 EPH Hayagitakan hetazotut’yunneri laboratoriaji 1975 t’. katarac hnagitakan ashkhatank’nerə (Archaeological Researches Carried Out by the YSU Laboratory for Armenian Studies in 1975). With H. Ye. Simonyan, Banber Erevani Hamalsarani, Hasarakakan gitut’yunner (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 1:284 – 288.
-   1976 Osvoenie zheleza v Ėgeide i na Blizhnem Vostoke – zakonomernosti razvitija tsivilizatsii, znanija i myshlenija (Mastering Iron in the Aegean and the Near East: Regularities in the Development of Civilization and Knowledge). In XIV mezhdunarodnaja konferentsija antichnikov sotsialisticheskikh stran “Ėirene” (“Eirene,” the 14th International Conference of Classicists from Socialist Countries). Yerevan: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia, 18 – 21.
-   1976 Poselenija III – I tysjacheletij do n.ė. v severnykh predgor’jakh Araratskoj doliny (3rd – 1st Millennia BC Settlements in the Highlands to the North from Ararat Plain). In II respublikanskaja nauchnaja konferentsija po problemam kul’tury i iskusstva Armenii (The 2nd National Scientific Conference Devoted to the Study of the Culture and Art of Armenia). Yerevan, 103 – 105.
-   1976 Zhelezo v kul’yure drevnej Perednej Azii I bassejna Ėgejskogo morja (po dannym pis’mennykh istochnikov) (Iron in the Cultures of Ancient Western Asia and the Aegean According to Written Sources). Sovetskaja arkheologija (Soviet Archaeology), no. 1:87 – 99.
-   1975 Pervye zheleznye izdelija Blizhnego Vostoka i Balkanskogo poluostrova (The First Iron Artifacts of the Near East and Balkan Peninsula). Haykakan SSH GA Lraber hasarakakan gitut’yunneri (The Journal of Social Sciences of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia), no. 12:86 – 99.
-   1975 Rozhdenie monumental’noi arkhitektury na territorii Armenii (pervaya polovina 3-go tysyacheletiya do n. e.) (The Appearance of Monumental Architecture in Armenia, First Half of the 3rd Millennium BC). With K.K. Ghafadarian, in Pamyatniki kul’tury, novye otkrytiya, Ezhegodnik 1974 (Monuments of Culture, New Discoveries. Annual Review 1974). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 397-403.
-   1975 Zhelezo v drevnej Zapadnoj Azii (Iron in Ancient Western Asia). A published summary of the Ph.D. Dissertation. Leningrad: Institute of Archaeology, 29 pages.
-   1974 Mokhrablur bnakavajri storin sherteri bnut’agrman shurj (Toward the characterization of the lower levels of the Mokhrablur settlement). In P.M. Muradyan (ed.) Hayagitakan hetazotut’yunner (Armenian Studies), vol. I, Yerevan: Yerevan University Press, 144 – 154.
-   1974 Pannezemledel’cheskaja kul’tura Armjanskogo nagor’ja i Perednjaja Azija (The Culture of the Early Farmers of the Armenian Highland and its Links with Western Asia). In Formy perekhoda ot prisvaivajushchego khozjajstva k proizvodjashchemu i osobennosti razvitija obshchestvennogo stroja (Models of Transition from Hunting-Gathering to Early Farming Economies and Specificities in the Development of Social Order (Materials of a Conference). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 72 – 76.
-   1974 Drevnejshie tsentry metallurgii zheleza v Zapadnoj Azii i Vostochnom Sredizemnomor’e (Earliest Centers of Iron Metallurgy in Western Asia and Eastern Mediterranean). Vestnik Yerevanskogo Universiteta, Obshchestvennye nauki (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 3:124 – 138.
-   1974 O rannem ėtape osvojenija zheleza v Armenii i na Juzhnom Kavkaze (On the Early Stage of Ironworking in Armenia and the Southern Caucasus). Istoriko-filologicheskij zhurnal AN Arm. SSR (Journal of History and Philology), no. 2:192 – 212.

1973* Maloazijskie formy v keramike Armenii srednego bronzovogo veka (Anatolian Shapes in Middle Bronze Age Pottery from Armenia). Sovetskaja arkheologija (Soviet Archaeology), no. 4:40 – 49.

-   1973 Otkrytie monumental’nogo kul’tovogo sooruzhenija nachala III tysjacheletija do n. ė. v Armenii (The Discovery of a Monumental Cultic Building Dating to the Beginning of the 3rd Millennium BC in Armenia). With K.K. Ghafadarian, in B.A. Rybakov (ed.) Arkheologicheskie otkrytija 1972 goda. (Archaeological Discoveries of 1972). Moscow: “Nauka” Press, 443.
-   1972 K vydeleniju rannezeledel’cheskikh kul’tur Armjanskogo nagor’ja I Juzhnogo Kavkaza (Toward the Identification of Early Agricultural Cultures of the Armenian Highland and Southern Caucasus). In V. M. Masson (ed.) Kamennyj vek Srednej Azii i Kazakhstana (The Stone Age of Central Asia and Kazakhstan). Tashkent: “Fan” Press, 57 – 58.
-   1972 Nekotorye itogi rabot Mokhrablurskoj arkheologicheskoj ėkspeditsii 1970 – 1971 g.g. (Some Results of the Works of the Mokhrablur Archaeological Expedition, 1970 – 1971). Sessija posvjashchennaja itogam polevykh arkheologicheskikh issledovanij 1971 goda (Session devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in 1971). Moscow, 221 – 222.
-   1972 Metaghagorcut’yunə Homerosi “Iliakanum” (Metallurgy in Homer's Iliad). In respublikanskoj nauchnoj konferentsii molodykh nauchnykh rabotnikov po gumanitarnym naukam (Materials of the National Conference of Graduate Students in the Humanities), Yerevan, 239 – 240.
-   1972 iz paskopok Mokhrablura 1970 goda (Data from the Excavations at Mokhrablur, 1970). Vestnik Yerevanskogo Universiteta, Obshchestvennye nauki (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 1:253 – 258.
-   1971 Moŕatsvac bnakavayrer Arak’si ap’in (Forgotten Settlements near Araxes River). Erevani Hamalsaran, Lratu (Bulletin of the Yerevan University), no. 11:28 – 31.
-   1970 Orudija truda Artikskogo mogil’nika (Tools from the Artik Necropolis). Istoriko-filologicheskij zhurnal AN Arm. SSR (Journal of History and Philology), no. 3(50):251 – 260.
-   1970 O nekotorykh pogrebenijakh Artikskogo nekropolja (On Several Graves of the Artik Necropolis). Molodoj nauchnyj rabotnik Erevanskogo Universiteta (Journal of the Graduate Students of the Yerevan University), no. 1:211 – 218.
-   1970 iz raskopok Karmirberdskogo (Tazakendskogo) mogil’nika v Muzee Gruzii (Collections from the Excavations of the Karmirberd (Tazakend) Cemetery at the Museum of Georgia). Vestnik Yerevanskogo Universiteta, Obshchestvennye nauki (Journal of the Yerevan University, Social Sciences Series), no. 1:239 – 247.
-   1969 Hnagitakan nor haytnagorcut’yunner Debedi avazanum (New Archaeological Discoveries in the Debed River basin). Patma-banasirakan handes (Journal of History and Philology), no. 1: 269 – 275.

Book and Conference Reviews

-   2014 Archaeology and Multidisciplinarity in a Regional and Ethnic Context: An International Conference at the Cotsen Institute. Backdirt 2014, Annual Review of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, 112-113.
-   2009 Review of Rouben Galichian, The Invention of History: Azerbaijan, Armenia and the Showcasing of Imagination. London: Gomidas Institute, 2009; Yerevan: Printinfo Art Books, 2009, pp. 119, Journal of the Society for Armenian Studies, Vol. 18, No. 2:136-138.
-   2007 Review of A. Y. Petrosyan, The Indo-European and Ancient Near Eastern Sources of the Armenian Epic: Myth and History (Journal of Indo-European Studies, Monograph No. 42, Washington D.C.: Institute for the Study of Man), Indo-European Studies Bulletin (UCLA), Vol.12, No. 1: 8-12.
-   2006 Review of Adam T. Smith and Karen S. Rubinson (editors), Archaeology in the Borderlands: Investigations in Caucasia and Beyond (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Monograph Series 47), American Journal of Archaeology 110(3): 513 – 514.
-   2003 Discovering Eurasian Opportunities. Review of the 2002 University of Chicago Conference on Eurasian Archaeology, Backdirt, Newsletter (from 2006 – The Annual Review) of the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA, Fall 2002/Winter 2003, p. 8.
-   1988 Soveshchanie v Otdelenii Istorii Akademii nauk SSSR (A Conference at the Division of History of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR). With L. Abrahamyan, Haykakan SSH GA Lraber hasarakakan gitut’yunneri (The Journal of Social Sciences of the Academy of Sciences of Armenia), no. 6: 93 – 96.
-   1987 Chetvertyj mezhdunarodnyj simpozium po armjanskomu iskusstvu, Sektsija “Iskusstvo drevnej Armenii. Narodnoe i prikladnoe iskusstvo” (The Fourth International Symposium on Armenian Art, Sessions devoted to Ancient, Folk, and Applied Arts). Sovetskoe iskusstvoznanie (Soviet Studies in Arts), vol. 22, Moscow: “Sovetskij khudozhnik” Press, 440 – 443.
-   1986 Mijazgayin konferans nvirvac hin Aŕajavor Asiayi patmut’yan, hnagitut’yan, lezvabanut’yan ev banasirut’yan hartserin (International Conference on the History, Archaeology, Linguistics, and Philology of Ancient Western Asia, Charles University, Prague). Patma-banasirakan handes (Journal of History and Philology), no. 4: 240 – 242.
-   1977 Gitakan nstashrjan nvirvac Haykakan SSH-um 1975 – 1976 t’.t’. dashtayin hnagitakan hetazotut’yunneri ardyunk’nerin (Conference Devoted to the Results of Archaeological Fieldwork in Armenia, 1975 – 1976). Patma-banasirakan handes (Journal of History and Philology), no. 3: 261 – 264.


See also

-   Areni-1 shoe
-   Areni-1 winery


References


External links

-   Online library of published papers by Gregory Areshian.
-   His page at National Academy of Sciences of Armenia
-   Paper Published on Research Gate

Category:Living people Category:Armenian historians Category:1949 births Category:Yerevan State University alumni Category:Saint Petersburg State University alumni Category:Armenian archaeologists Category:American archaeologists Category:Archaeologists of the Near East

[1]

[2]

[3]