In abstract algebra, a GROUP ISOMORPHISM is a function between two groups that sets up a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of the groups in a way that respects the given group operations. If there exists an isomorphism between two groups, then the groups are called ISOMORPHIC. From the standpoint of group theory, isomorphic groups have the same properties and need not be distinguished.


Definition and notation

Given two groups (G, ∗) and (H, ⊙), a _group isomorphism_ from (G, ∗) to (H, ⊙) is a bijective group homomorphism from G to H. Spelled out, this means that a group isomorphism is a bijective function f : G → H such that for all u and v in G it holds that

    f(u * v) = f(u) ⊙ f(v).

The two groups (G, ∗) and (H, ⊙) are isomorphic if there exists an isomorphism from one to the other. This is written:

    (G,  * ) ≅ (H,  ⊙ )

Often shorter and simpler notations can be used. When the relevant group operations are unambiguous they are omitted and one writes:

    G ≅ H

Sometimes one can even simply write G = H. Whether such a notation is possible without confusion or ambiguity depends on context. For example, the equals sign is not very suitable when the groups are both subgroups of the same group. See also the examples.

Conversely, given a group (G, ∗), a set H, and a bijection f : G → H, we can make H a group (H, ⊙) by defining

    f(u) ⊙ f(v) = f(u * v).

If H = G and ⊙ = ∗ then the bijection is an automorphism (_q.v._).

Intuitively, group theorists view two isomorphic groups as follows: For every element _g_ of a group _G_, there exists an element _h_ of _H_ such that _h_ 'behaves in the same way' as _g_ (operates with other elements of the group in the same way as _g_). For instance, if _g_ generates _G_, then so does _h_. This implies in particular that _G_ and _H_ are in bijective correspondence. Thus, the definition of an isomorphism is quite natural.

An isomorphism of groups may equivalently be defined as an invertible morphism in the category of groups, where invertible here means has a two-sided inverse.


Examples

In this section some notable examples of isomorphic groups are listed.

-   The group of all real numbers with addition, (ℝ,+), is isomorphic to the group of positive real numbers with multiplication (ℝ⁺,×):

    (ℝ,  + ) ≅ (ℝ⁺,  × ) via the isomorphism
    f(x) = e^(x) (see exponential function).

-   The group ℤ of integers (with addition) is a subgroup of ℝ, and the factor group ℝ/ℤ is isomorphic to the group S¹ of complex numbers of absolute value 1 (with multiplication):

    ℝ/ℤ ≅ S¹

-   The Klein four-group is isomorphic to the direct product of two copies of ℤ₂ = ℤ/2ℤ (see modular arithmetic), and can therefore be written ℤ₂ × ℤ₂. Another notation is Dih₂, because it is a dihedral group.
-   Generalizing this, for all odd _n_, Dih_(2_n_) is isomorphic with the direct product of Dih_(_n_) and Z₂.
-   If (_G_, ∗) is an infinite cyclic group, then (_G_, ∗) is isomorphic to the integers (with the addition operation). From an algebraic point of view, this means that the set of all integers (with the addition operation) is the 'only' infinite cyclic group.

Some groups can be proven to be isomorphic, relying on the axiom of choice, but the proof does not indicate how to construct a concrete isomorphism. Examples:

-   The group (ℝ, +) is isomorphic to the group (ℂ, +) of all complex numbers with addition.[1]
-   The group (ℂ^(*), ·) of non-zero complex numbers with multiplication as operation is isomorphic to the group _S_¹ mentioned above.


Properties

The kernel of an isomorphism from (_G_, ∗) to (_H_, ⊙), is always {e_(G)} where e_(G) is the identity of the group (_G_, ∗)

If (_G_, ∗) is isomorphic to (_H_,⊙), and if _G_ is abelian then so is _H_.

If (_G_, ∗) is a group that is isomorphic to (_H_, ⊙) [where _f_ is the isomorphism], then if _a_ belongs to _G_ and has order _n_, then so does _f(a)_.

If (_G_, ∗) is a locally finite group that is isomorphic to (_H_, ⊙), then (_H_, ⊙) is also locally finite.

The number of distinct groups (when isomorphic groups are considered equal) of order n is given by sequence A000001 in OEIS. The first few numbers are 0, 1, 1, 1 and 2 meaning that 4 is the lowest order with more than one group.


Cyclic groups

All cyclic groups of a given order are isomorphic to (ℤ_(n), +_(n)).

Let _G_ be a cyclic group and _n_ be the order of _G_. _G_ is then the group generated by ⟨x⟩ = {e, x, ..., x^(n − 1)}. We will show that

    G ≅ (ℤ_(n), +_(n))

Define

    φ : G → ℤ_(n) = {0, 1, ..., n − 1}, so that φ(x^(a)) = a. Clearly, φ is bijective.

Then

    φ(x^(a) ⋅ x^(b)) = φ(x^(a + b)) = a + b = φ(x^(a))+_(n)φ(x^(b)), which proves that G ≅ (ℤ_(n), +_(n)).


Consequences

From the definition, it follows that any isomorphism f : G → H will map the identity element of G to the identity element of H,

    f(e_(G)) = e_(H)

that it will map inverses to inverses,

    f(u^( − 1)) = [f(u)]^( − 1)

and more generally, _n_th powers to _n_th powers,

    f(u^(n)) = [f(u)]^(n)

for all u in G, and that the inverse map f^( − 1) : H → G is also a group isomorphism.

The relation "being isomorphic" satisfies all the axioms of an equivalence relation. If f is an isomorphism between two groups G and H, then everything that is true about G that is only related to the group structure can be translated via f into a true ditto statement about H, and vice versa.


Automorphisms

An isomorphism from a group (G, ∗) to itself is called an automorphism of this group. Thus it is a bijection f : G → G such that

    f(u) * f(v) = f(u * v).

An automorphism always maps the identity to itself. The image under an automorphism of a conjugacy class is always a conjugacy class (the same or another). The image of an element has the same order as that element.

The composition of two automorphisms is again an automorphism, and with this operation the set of all automorphisms of a group G, denoted by Aut(G), forms itself a group, the _automorphism group_ of G.

For all abelian groups there is at least the automorphism that replaces the group elements by their inverses. However, in groups where all elements are equal to their inverse this is the trivial automorphism, e.g. in the Klein four-group. For that group all permutations of the three non-identity elements are automorphisms, so the automorphism group is isomorphic to S₃ and Dih₃.

In Z_(p) for a prime number p, one non-identity element can be replaced by any other, with corresponding changes in the other elements. The automorphism group is isomorphic to . For example, for , multiplying all elements of Z₇ by 3, modulo 7, is an automorphism of order 6 in the automorphism group, because , while lower powers do not give 1. Thus this automorphism generates Z₆. There is one more automorphism with this property: multiplying all elements of Z₇ by 5, modulo 7. Therefore, these two correspond to the elements 1 and 5 of Z₆, in that order or conversely.

The automorphism group of Z₆ is isomorphic to Z₂, because only each of the two elements 1 and 5 generate Z₆, so apart from the identity we can only interchange these.

The automorphism group of has order 168, as can be found as follows. All 7 non-identity elements play the same role, so we can choose which plays the role of (1,0,0). Any of the remaining 6 can be chosen to play the role of (0,1,0). This determines which corresponds to (1,1,0). For (0,0,1) we can choose from 4, which determines the rest. Thus we have automorphisms. They correspond to those of the Fano plane, of which the 7 points correspond to the 7 non-identity elements. The lines connecting three points correspond to the group operation: _a_, _b_, and _c_ on one line means , , and . See also general linear group over finite fields.

For abelian groups all automorphisms except the trivial one are called outer automorphisms.

Non-abelian groups have a non-trivial inner automorphism group, and possibly also outer automorphisms.


See also

-   Bijective function


References

-   Herstein, I. N., _Topics in Algebra_, Wiley; 2 edition (June 20, 1975), .

Category:Group theory Category:Morphisms

[1]