IA-32 (short for "INTEL ARCHITECTURE, 32-BIT", sometimes also called I386[1][2])[3] is the 32-bit version of the x86 instruction set architecture, designed by Intel and first implemented in the 80386 microprocessor in 1985. IA-32 is the first incarnation of x86 that supports 32-bit computing;[4] as a result, the "IA-32" term may be used as a metonym to refer to all x86 versions that support 32-bit computing.[5][6]

Within various programming language directives, IA-32 is still sometimes referred to as the "i386" architecture. In some other contexts, certain iterations of the IA-32 ISA are sometimes labelled I486, I586 and I686, referring to the instruction supersets offered by the 80486, the P5 and the P6 microarchitectures respectively. These updates offered numerous additions alongside the base IA-32 set, i.e. floating-point capabilities and the MMX extensions.

Intel was historically the largest manufacturer of IA-32 processors, with the second biggest supplier having been AMD. During the 1990s, VIA, Transmeta and other chip manufacturers also produced IA-32 compatible processors (e.g. WinChip). In the modern era, Intel still produces IA-32 processors under the Intel Quark microcontroller platform, however, since the 2000s, the majority of manufacturers (Intel included) moved almost exclusively to implementing CPUs based on the 64-bit variant of x86, x86-64. x86-64, by specification, offers legacy operating modes that operate on the IA-32 ISA for backwards compatibility. Even given the contemporary prevalence of x86-64, as of 2018, IA-32 protected mode versions of many modern operating systems are still maintained, e.g. Microsoft Windows[7] and the Ubuntu Linux distribution.[8] In spite of IA-32's name (and causing some potential confusion), the 64-bit evolution of x86 that originated out of AMD would not be known as "IA-64", that name instead belonging to Intel's Itanium architecture.


Architectural features

The primary defining characteristic of IA-32 is the availability of 32-bit general-purpose processor registers (for example, EAX and EBX), 32-bit integer arithmetic and logical operations, 32-bit offsets within a segment in protected mode, and the translation of segmented addresses to 32-bit linear addresses. The designers took the opportunity to make other improvements as well. Some of the most significant changes are described below.

32-bit integer capability
    All general-purpose registers (GPRs) are expanded from 16 bits to 32 bits, and all arithmetic and logical operations, memory-to-register and register-to-memory operations, etc., can operate directly on 32-bit integers. Pushes and pops on the stack default to 4-byte strides, and non-segmented pointers are 4 bytes wide.

More general addressing modes
    Any GPR can be used as a base register, and any GPR other than ESP can be used as an index register, in a memory reference. The index register value can be multiplied by 1, 2, 4, or 8 before being added to the base register value and displacement.

Additional segment registers
    Two additional segment registers, FS and GS, are provided.

Larger virtual address space
    The IA-32 architecture defines a 48-bit segmented address format, with a 16-bit segment number and a 32-bit offset within the segment. Segmented addresses are mapped to 32-bit linear addresses.

Demand paging
    32-bit linear addresses are virtual addresses rather than physical addresses; they are translated to physical addresses through a page table. In the 80386, 80486, and the original Pentium processors, the physical address was 32 bits; in the Pentium Pro and later processors, the Physical Address Extension allowed 36-bit physical addresses, although the linear address size was still 32 bits.


Operating modes

  Operating mode                                                                 Operating system required                                                 Type of code being run       Default address size   Default operand size   Typical GPR width
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------- -------------------
  Protected mode                                                                 32-bit operating system or boot loader                                    32-bit protected-mode code   32 bits                32 bits                32 bits
  16-bit protected-mode operating system or boot loader, or 32-bit boot loader   16-bit protected-mode code                                                16 bits                      16 bits                16 or 32 bits
  Virtual 8086 mode                                                              16- or 32-bit protected-mode operating system                             16-bit real-mode code        16 bits                16 bits                16 or 32 bits
  Real mode                                                                      16-bit real-mode operating system or boot loader, or 32-bit boot loader   16-bit real-mode code        16 bits                16 bits                16 or 32 bits


See also

-   IA-64
-   List of former IA-32 compatible processor manufacturers


References

Category:Computer-related introductions in 1985 Category:X86 architecture

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]  Microsoft|website=www.microsoft.com|language=en-us|access-date=August 20, 2018}}

[8]  Ubuntu|last=Canonical|website=www.ubuntu.com|language=en|access-date=August 20, 2018}}