INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC TIME (TAI, from the French name [1]) is a
high-precision atomic coordinate time standard based on the notional
passage of proper time on Earth's geoid.[2] It is the principal
realisation of Terrestrial Time (with a fixed offset of epoch). It is
also the basis for Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), which is used for
civil timekeeping all over the Earth's surface. , when another leap
second was added,[3] TAI is exactly 37 seconds ahead of UTC. The 37
seconds results from the initial difference of 10 seconds at the start
of 1972, plus 27 leap seconds in UTC since 1972.

TAI may be reported using traditional means of specifying days, carried
over from non-uniform time standards based on the rotation of the Earth.
Specifically, both Julian Dates and the Gregorian calendar are used. TAI
in this form was synchronised with Universal Time at the beginning of
1958, and the two have drifted apart ever since, due to the changing
motion of the Earth.


Operation

TAI is a weighted average of the time kept by over 400 atomic clocks[4]
in over 50 national laboratories worldwide.[5] The majority of the
clocks involved are caesium clocks; the International System of Units
(SI) definition of the second is based on caesium. The clocks are
compared using GPS signals and two-way satellite time and frequency
transfer.[6] Due to the signal averaging TAI is an order of magnitude
more stable than its best constituent clock.

The participating institutions each broadcast, in real time, a frequency
signal with timecodes, which is their estimate of TAI. Time codes are
usually published in the form of UTC, which differs from TAI by a
well-known integer number of seconds. These time scales are denoted in
the form _UTC(NPL)_ in the UTC form, where _NPL_ in this case identifies
the National Physical Laboratory, UK. The TAI form may be denoted
_TAI(NPL)_. The latter is not to be confused with _TA(NPL)_, which
denotes an independent atomic time scale, not synchronised to TAI or to
anything else.

The clocks at different institutions are regularly compared against each
other. The International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM, France),
combines these measurements to retrospectively calculate the weighted
average that forms the most stable time scale possible.[7] This combined
time scale is published monthly in "Circular T",[8] and is the canonical
TAI. This time scale is expressed in the form of tables of differences
UTC − UTC(_k_) (equivalent to TAI − TAI(_k_)) for each participating
institution _k_. The same circular also gives tables of TAI − TA(_k_),
for the various unsynchronised atomic time scales.

Errors in publication may be corrected by issuing a revision of the
faulty Circular T or by errata in a subsequent Circular T. Aside from
this, once published in Circular T, the TAI scale is not revised. In
hindsight it is possible to discover errors in TAI, and to make better
estimates of the true proper time scale. Since the published circulars
are definitive, better estimates do not create another version of TAI;
it is instead considered to be creating a better realisation of
Terrestrial Time (TT).


History

Early atomic time scales consisted of quartz clocks with frequencies
calibrated by a single atomic clock; the atomic clocks were not operated
continuously. Atomic timekeeping services started experimentally in
1955, using the first caesium atomic clock at the National Physical
Laboratory, UK (NPL). It was used as a basis for calibrating the quartz
clocks at the Royal Greenwich Observatory and to establish a time scale,
called Greenwich Atomic (GA). The United States Naval Observatory began
the A.1 scale on 13 September 1956, using an Atomichron commercial
atomic clock, followed by the NBS-A scale at the National Bureau of
Standards, Boulder, Colorado on 9 October 1957.

The International Time Bureau (BIH) began a time scale, T_(m) or AM, in
July 1955, using both local caesium clocks and comparisons to distant
clocks using the phase of VLF radio signals. The BIH scale, A.1, and
NBS-A were defined by an epoch at the beginning of 1958 The procedures
used by the BIH evolved, and the name for the time scale changed: "A3"
in 1964[9] and "TA(BIH)" in 1969.

The SI second was defined in terms of the caesium atom in 1967. From
1971 to 1975 the General Conference on Weights and Measures and the
International Committee for Weights and Measures made a series of
decisions which designated the BIPM time scale International Atomic Time
(TAI).

In the 1970s, it became clear that the clocks participating in TAI were
ticking at different rates due to gravitational time dilation, and the
combined TAI scale therefore corresponded to an average of the altitudes
of the various clocks. Starting from Julian Date 2443144.5 (1 January
1977 00:00:00), corrections were applied to the output of all
participating clocks, so that TAI would correspond to proper time at
mean sea level (the geoid). Because the clocks were, on average, well
above sea level, this meant that TAI slowed down, by about one part in a
trillion. The former uncorrected time scale continues to be published,
under the name _EAL_ (_Echelle Atomique Libre_, meaning _Free Atomic
Scale_).

The instant that the gravitational correction started to be applied
serves as the epoch for Barycentric Coordinate Time (TCB), Geocentric
Coordinate Time (TCG), and Terrestrial Time (TT), which represent three
fundamental time scales in the solar system.[10] All three of these time
scales were defined to read JD 2443144.5003725 (1 January 1977
00:00:32.184) exactly at that instant. TAI was henceforth a realisation
of TT, with the equation TT(TAI) = TAI + 32.184 s.

The continued existence of TAI was questioned in a 2007 letter from the
BIPM to the ITU-R which stated, "In the case of a redefinition of UTC
without leap seconds, the CCTF would consider discussing the possibility
of suppressing TAI, as it would remain parallel to the continuous
UTC."[11]


Relation to UTC

UTC is a discontinuous time scale. It is regularly adjusted by leap
seconds. Between these adjustments it is composed from segments that are
linear transformations of atomic time. From its beginning in 1961
through December 1971 the adjustments were made regularly in fractional
leap seconds so that UTC approximated UT2. Afterwards these adjustments
were made only in whole seconds to approximate UT1. This was a
compromise arrangement in order to enable a publicly broadcast time
scale; the post-1971 more linear transformation of the BIH's atomic time
meant that the time scale would be more stable and easier to synchronize
internationally. The fact that it continues to approximate UT1 means
that tasks such as navigation which require a source of Universal Time
continue to be well served by the public broadcast of UTC.


See also

-   Clock synchronization
-   Network Time Protocol
-   Precision Time Protocol
-   Time and frequency transfer


Notes


References

-   -

Footnotes


Bibliography

-   {{ cite book

| ref = harv | url =
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-bib_query?bibcode=2000pmhs.conf..175G
| last = Guinot | first = B | chapter = History of the Bureau
International de l'Heure | title = Polar Motion: Historical and
Scientific Problems | series = ASP Conference Series, Vol. 208 | isbn =
1-58381-039-0 | date = 2000 }}

-


External links

-   Bureau International des Poids et Mesures: TAI
-   Time and Frequency Section - National Physical Laboratory, UK
-   IERS website
-   NIST Web Clock FAQs
-   History of time scales
-   NIST-F1 Cesium Fountain Atomic Clock
-   -   Japan Standard Time Project, NICT, Japan
-   -   Standard of time definition: UTC, GPS, LORAN and TAI

Category:Time scales

[1] Temps atomique 1975

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]