LINEAR PREDICTION is a mathematical operation where future values of a discrete-time signal are estimated as a linear function of previous samples.

In digital signal processing, linear prediction is often called linear predictive coding (LPC) and can thus be viewed as a subset of filter theory. In system analysis (a subfield of mathematics), linear prediction can be viewed as a part of mathematical modelling or optimization.


The prediction model

The most common representation is

$$\widehat{x}(n) = \sum_{i=1}^p a_i x(n-i)\,$$

where x̂(n) is the predicted signal value, x(n − i) the previous observed values, with p <  = n, and a_(i) the predictor coefficients. The error generated by this estimate is

_e_(_n_) = _x_(_n_) − _x̂_(_n_) 

where x(n) is the true signal value.

These equations are valid for all types of (one-dimensional) linear prediction. The differences are found in the way the predictor coefficients a_(i) are chosen.

For multi-dimensional signals the error metric is often defined as

_e_(_n_) = ∥_x_(_n_) − _x̂_(_n_)∥ 

where ∥ ⋅ ∥ is a suitable chosen vector norm. Predictions such as x̂(n) are routinely used within Kalman filters and smoothers[1] to estimate current and past signal values, respectively.

Estimating the parameters

The most common choice in optimization of parameters a_(i) is the root mean square criterion which is also called the autocorrelation criterion. In this method we minimize the expected value of the squared error E[e²(n)], which yields the equation

$$\sum_{i=1}^p a_i R(j-i) = R(j),$$

for 1 ≤ _j_ ≤ _p_, where _R_ is the autocorrelation of signal _x__(_n_), defined as

 _R_(_i_) = _E_{_x_(_n_)_x_(_n_ − _i_)} 
,

and _E_ is the expected value. In the multi-dimensional case this corresponds to minimizing the L₂ norm.

The above equations are called the normal equations or Yule-Walker equations. In matrix form the equations can be equivalently written as

_R__a_ = _r_, 

where the autocorrelation matrix R is a symmetric, p × p Toeplitz matrix with elements r_(ij) = R(i − j), 0 ≤ i, j < p, the vector r is the autocorrelation vector r_(j) = R(j), 0 < j ≤ p, and the vector a is the parameter vector.

Another, more general, approach is to minimize the sum of squares of the errors defined in the form

$$e(n) = x(n) - \widehat{x}(n) = x(n) - \sum_{i=1}^p a_i x(n-i) = - \sum_{i=0}^p a_i x(n-i)$$

where the optimisation problem searching over all a_(i) must now be constrained with a₀ =  − 1.

On the other hand, if the mean square prediction error is constrained to be unity and the prediction error equation is included on top of the normal equations, the augmented set of equations is obtained as

 _R__a_ = [1, 0, ..., 0]^(_T_)

where the index _i_ ranges from 0 to _p_, and _R_ is a (_p_ + 1) × (_p_ + 1) matrix.

Specification of the parameters of the linear predictor is a wide topic and a large number of other approaches have been proposed. In fact, the autocorrelation method is the most common and it is used, for example, for speech coding in the GSM standard.

Solution of the matrix equation _Ra_ = _r_ is computationally a relatively expensive process. The Gaussian elimination for matrix inversion is probably the oldest solution but this approach does not efficiently use the symmetry of _R_ and _r_. A faster algorithm is the Levinson recursion proposed by Norman Levinson in 1947, which recursively calculates the solution. In particular, the autocorrelation equations above may be more efficiently solved by the Durbin algorithm.[2]

In 1986, Philippe Delsarte and Y.V. Genin proposed an improvement to this algorithm called the split Levinson recursion, which requires about half the number of multiplications and divisions.[3] It uses a special symmetrical property of parameter vectors on subsequent recursion levels. That is, calculations for the optimal predictor containing _p_ terms make use of similar calculations for the optimal predictor containing _p_ − 1 terms.

Another way of identifying model parameters is to iteratively calculate state estimates using Kalman filters and obtaining maximum likelihood estimates within expectation–maximization algorithms.

For equally-spaced values, a polynomial interpolation is a linear combination of the known values. If the discrete time signal is estimated to obey a polynomial of degree p − 1, then the predictor coefficients a_(i) are given by the corresponding row of the triangle of binomial transform coefficients. This estimate might be suitable for a slowly varying signal with low noise. The predictions for the first few values of _p_ are

    \begin{array}{lcl}

p=1 & : & \widehat{x}(n) = 1x(n-1)\\ p=2 & : & \widehat{x}(n) = 2x(n-1) - 1x(n-2) \\ p=3 & : & \widehat{x}(n) = 3x(n-1) - 3x(n-2) + 1x(n-3)\\ p=4 & : & \widehat{x}(n) = 4x(n-1) - 6x(n-2) + 4x(n-3) - 1x(n-4)\\ \end{array}


See also

-   Autoregressive model
-   Prediction interval
-   Rasta filtering
-   Minimum mean square error


References


Further reading

-   -   -   -


External links

-   PLP and RASTA (and MFCC, and inversion) in Matlab

Category:Signal estimation Category:Statistical forecasting

[1]

[2]

[3] Delsarte, P. and Genin, Y. V. (1986), _The split Levinson algorithm_, _IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing_, v. ASSP-34(3), pp. 470–478