This is a list of characters from , a 2016–17 Japanese _tokusatsu_ drama written by Yuya Takahashi, the 27th in the Kamen Rider Series. The 45-episode television series centers around a conflict between humans and Bugsters, a form of computer virus that infects humans playing Genm Corp video games. Once a Bugster fully manifests, the human host's personality fades away. Genm Corp and the Ministry of Health counter the Bugster threat by developing Gamer Driver belts and a series of transformation- and summon-type trinkets, the Rider Gashats, for doctors to save their patients from the Bugster viruses.

Characters include a number of doctors and other health-care workers, corporate employees, and Bugsters. Some of these characters also appear in the films _Kamen Rider Heisei Generations: Dr. Pac-Man vs. Ex-Aid & Ghost with Legend Rider_, _Kamen Rider × Super Sentai: Ultra Super Hero Taisen_, _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid the Movie: True Ending_ and _Kamen Rider Heisei Generations Final: Build & Ex-Aid with Legend Rider_, various web series, and a video game of the _Kamen Rider:Climax_ series.


Seito University Hospital

is a prestigious medical facility. The (abbreviated CR) is secretly located in the basement of the hospital. It operates under the authority of the and is used for isolating and rescuing Bugster Virus victims. It was founded five years before the present storyline during , before the Bugster infection was made public.

Emu Hojo

, also known by his gaming tag of "M", is a 24-year-old pediatrics intern who later becomes a surgical intern and master gamer. He was inspired to become a doctor after receiving a special life-saving surgery from Kyotaro Hinata as a child. Kyotaro also gave Emu a WonderSwan handheld console as a present which ignited his interest in gaming. He is friendly and well-meaning but also clumsy and somewhat absentminded, which often gets him into trouble with the nurses. As the series progress, however, Emu matures and becomes less naive, even picking up some of Kiriya's habits of lying and showing himself to be just as good a manipulator as Kuroto and Masamune. His gaming skills earn him a and a cartridge-like so that he can fight the Bugsters.

16 years prior to the series, Emu was an antisocial child who found solace in designing game characters. After sending his concepts to Genm Corp game designer Kuroto Dan, Emu received a prototype game which infected him as patient zero of the Bugster Virus and created another persona named Parad, manifested from his desire to have a playmate. Parad's dominance in Emu's body helped the boy rise to fame as until he was abducted by Next Genome scientists to extract the Bugster Viruses for Kuroto. Parad emerged from the operation as a Bugster; their separation allowed Emu to regain his inspiration as a doctor and earn an internship at Seito University Hospital. Remnants of Parad in his body allow Emu to retain his gamer persona and the resistance needed to use the Gamer Driver while creating Gashats from his imagination.

Emu experienced a near-fatal outburst when his true nature was revealed by Kuroto; Parad intervened by possessing Emu until Hiiro returned him to his senses. At the height of the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, Emu regained Poppy as an ally following her brainwashing. Parad then possessed Emu and forced him to fight against his own Bugster to the point of exhaustion, until Poppy revived Kuroto and used his Level 0 form's power to negate the Bugster's possession, preventing Parad from possessing Emu again. Kuroto's father, Masamune, returned as CEO of Genm Corp. and revealed that he'd been using Kuroto and Emu as pawns, and that he is also a patient zero.

Using the platform game-based Gashat allows Emu to become Kamen Rider Ex-Aid. His _chibi_-like first form, , can utilize agile attacks. Pulling the Gamer Driver's lever upgrades Ex-Aid to his sleeker primary form, . Ex-Aid's in these and other recent forms is the , which has two modes: Hammer and Blade. When activating Mighty Action X, a digital field-like is generated which creates several medal-like with unique power-ups in random chocolate block-like containers.

-   : A beat 'em up-based Gashat that summons the mecha-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Mighty Action X before pulling its lever, Ex-Aid combines with the Robot Gama to assume where he is equipped with the gauntlet-like on his left arm for enhanced punching. He can also launch the Gekitotsu Smasher as a rocket fist for long range combat.

-   : A monster-hunting game-based Gashat that summons the dragon-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Mighty Action X before pulling its lever, Ex-Aid combines with the Hunter Gama to assume where he is equipped with the headgear-like for either biting or breathing streams of fire. He can also extend the Dragon Fang's tail as a whip.

    -   Ex-Aid can transform into , which combines the abilities and weapons of his and the other Riders' Level 5 forms. However, due to Drago Knight Hunter Z's nature as a multiplayer game, using its Gashat to assume this full-armored form causes Ex-Aid to malfunction and Emu's body to be taken over, resulting in him attacking enemies and allies alike. Seeing how teamwork cooperation is important, he tricks Brave, Snipe and Lazer into fighting against him in their Level 3 forms, allowing the Gashat's power to be equally distributed among them upon his and Hunter Gama's defeat.

-   : A sports game-based Gashat that summons the bicycle-like for Ex-Aid to ride upon. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Mighty Action X before pulling its lever, Ex-Aid combines with the Sports Gama to assume equipped with the disc-like on his shoulders for projectile throwing. This Gashat originally belonged to Genm until Ex-Aid defeated him with Hunter Action Gamer Level 5 (Dragon Fang) and claimed it for himself.

-   : A cooking game-based Gashat that summons the food-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Mighty Action X before pulling its lever, Ex-Aid combines with the Burger Gama to assume where he is equipped with both the roller-skate-like for increased speed and the dual condiment bottle-like and on his arms for shooting energy blasts of ketchup and mustard. Para-DX steals this Gashat and gives it to Kuroto after defeating Ex-Aid.

-   : A hack-and-slash-based Gashat that originally belonged to Lazer before Genm killed him and stole it. Ex-Aid later claims it after Genm is defeated by Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99, Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50 and Brave Hunter Quest Level 5 (Full Dragon).

After Kiriya's death, Emu receives both his Gamer Driver and the racing game-based Gashat as mementos. By inserting this Gashat into the strap-like on his Gamer Driver's left waist, Ex-Aid summons the motorcycle-like to ride upon. He is also able to perform its finisher. Following the destruction of his Gamer Driver by Genm, Emu uses Kiriya's Gamer Driver as a backup belt until it is stolen by Hiiro, under duress from Masamune Dan who used it to revive Kiriya as Lazer Turbo. Soon after, Kuroto repairs Emu's original Gamer Driver to functionality.

Emu later acquires the Gashat, a co-op version of Mighty Action X whose concept he created during his childhood. Inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver and then pulling its lever transforms Ex-Aid into the _chibi_-like . By closing and pulling the Gamer Driver's lever a second time, he upgrades to the sleeker where he splits into two Level X forms: Double Action Gamer Level XX R, an orange-colored right half with M's (later Parad) hot-blooded gamer personality who prioritizes defeating his opponent to ensure victory, and Double Action Gamer Level XX L, an azure-colored left half with Emu's level-headed doctor personality who prioritizes his patient's safety. In these forms, Ex-Aid's health bar-like is tripled. However, if two of his Level X form's Rider Gauges are empty, he will be unable to assume his Level XX form. Ex-Aid's Gashacon weapon in these and other recent forms is the , which has three modes: Blade, Axe, and Gun. During battle, the Level XX halves either pass the Gashacon Key Slasher between each other or each wield it and the Gashacon Breaker. Unlike most Gashacon weapons which can hold a single Gashat for any rider to perform its finisher, the Gashacon Key Slasher can hold either two Gashats or one dual-based Gashat. Inserting Mighty Brothers XX into the Gashacon Key Slasher allows one Level XX half to manifest a temporary duplicate of the Gashacon Weapon for the other half to wield. If the Level XX halves simultaneously close and pull their Gamer Driver's lever, Ex-Aid can perform his Critical Strike. At first, using this Gashat's power had the side effect of Emu suffering an extreme headache followed by a temporary loss of consciousness upon deactivation. However, once he learns of his current status as a progenitor to the Bugster Virus, he no longer has this problem. This Gashat first appears in _Kamen Rider Heisei Generations: Dr. Pac-Man vs. Ex-Aid & Ghost with Legend Rider_, though it was a temporary fusion of the Mighty Action X and Proto Mighty Action X Gashats. In the series, Emu recreates the Mighty Brothers XX Gashat after receiving a blank Gashat and inserting it into the Gamer Driver to make contact with his immune system.

Using money obtained from Taiga for development, Tsukuru creates a new blank Gashat infused with the Bugster Virus samples from Kiriya's research given directly from Yoshitaka to Hiiro then Taiga. However, only someone with a natural antibody-like Ex-Aid could complete its creation. Like Mighty Brothers XX, Emu imprints the blank Gashat with his DNA to create the mecha simulation game-based Gashat. Inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver and then pulling its lever simultaneously transforms Ex-Aid into his Level 2 form and summons the armored suit-like , which resembles his Level 1 form. Pressing its top button afterwards combines Ex-Aid with the Maximum Gama to assume where he gains the ability to rewrite a Bugster's coding, allowing him to render a Rider's compatible surgery powerless and heal any victims of Game Disease, thus making him the ultimate cure for the Bugster infection. He can also fly, extend his limbs and eject himself from the Maximum Gama, which has an autopilot to assist Ex-Aid during combat. By closing and pulling the Gamer Driver's lever a second time, Ex-Aid can perform his finisher.

-   : A cheat cartridge-based Gashat that when attached to Maximum Mighty X evolves Maximum Gamer Level 99 into Ex-Aid's ultimate form, , where he gains warping capabilities and is immune to negative status effects, such as Cronus' Pause ability. By pressing this Gashat's top button twice in succession, Ex-Aid can perform his finisher. If this Gashat is placed into the Gamer Driver's secondary slot and its lever is pulled, it activates a which grants the Rider using it 10 seconds of invincibility. At first, Emu was unable to use this Gashat due to losing his gamer persona after being "separated" from Parad. However, he manages to reawaken his gamer persona by luring Parad into the Gashacon Bugvisor II and uses it to inject the aforementioned Bugster into himself, enabling him to bring out Hyper Muteki's full potential. After Hyper Muteki is erased from existence by Cronus' Reset ability, Emu helps Kuroto create a second Gashat which includes a function to ensure that Ex-Aid and his allies won't be affected by the effects of Reset anymore.

After Gamedeus is released from Kamen Rider Chronicle and its Game Disease is spread, Kuroto creates the Gashat, a medical-based antivirus version of Mighty Brothers XX, as a means of counteracting the epidemic by using samples of its virus from his and Kiriya's Bugster bodies; Kiriya delivers it to Ex-Aid after he turns Kuroto over to the authorities. To defeat Gamedues and reverse its Game Disease, Ex-Aid inserts Doctor Mighty XX into the Gashacon Key Slasher to perform its Critical Finish. Poppy later uses this Gashat to sacrifice her physical body and cure Gamedeus Cronus' Bugster-zombified victims before Para-DX uses it himself to destroy Gamedeus at the cost of his own life. It is unknown if this Gashat was restored after Emu revived Parad.

In other _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid_ media, Ex-Aid has access to other Gamer forms that do not appear in the canon of the TV series. These include:

-   : A Legend Rider Gashat based on Kamen Rider Ghost that allows Ex-Aid to transform into the _chibi_-like and upgrade to the sleeker by pulling the Gamer Driver's lever. In these forms, he is armed with the Gan Gun Saber. Ex-Aid's Critical Strike in his Level 2 form is a variation of the Ore Omega Drive (Ghost's Rider Kick). These forms are exclusive to both _Kamen Rider Heisei Generations: Dr. Pac-Man vs. Ex-Aid & Ghost with Legend Rider_ and _Kamen Rider Genm: Legend Rider Stage_.

-   : A Legend Rider Gashat based on Kamen Rider Drive that allows Ex-Aid to transform into the _chibi_-like and upgrade to the sleeker by pulling the Gamer Driver's lever. In these forms, he is armed with the Handle-Ken. Ex-Aid's Critical Strike in his Level 2 form is a variation of the SpeeDrop (Drive's Rider Kick). These forms are exclusive to _Kamen Rider Genm: Legend Rider Stage_.

-   : A Legend Rider Gashat based on Kamen Rider Gaim that allows Ex-Aid to transform into the _chibi_-like , as well as upgrade to the sleeker by pulling the Gamer Driver's lever. These forms are armed with the Daidaimaru. Ex-Aid's Critical Strike in his Level 2 form is a variation of the Burai Kick (Gaim's Rider Kick). These forms are exclusive to _Kamen Rider Genm: Legend Rider Stage_.

-   : A Legend Game Gashat based on _Pac-Man_ that summons the support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Mighty Action X before pulling its lever, Ex-Aid combines with the Pac Gama to assume . This form is exclusive to _Kamen Rider Genm: Legend Gamer Stage_.

-   : A Legend Game Gashat based on _Taiko no Tatsujin_ exclusive to _Kamen Rider Genm: Final Legend Stage_.

-   : A special version of the beta-test Gashat that Ex-Aid obtains after clearing . By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Mighty Action X before pulling its lever, he transforms into a hybrid form of himself and Lazer known as where he gains super speed and wields both the knuckle-like for close range combat and the blaster-like for long range combat. This form is exclusive to the _Kamen Rider Lazer_ Hyper Battle DVD.

-   : A sequel-based Gashat of Knock Out Fighter that allows Ex-Aid and Para-DX to simultaneously transform into . By closing and pulling their Gamer Driver's lever a second time, Ex-Aid and Para-DX can perform their finisher together. These forms are exclusive to the _Kamen Rider Para-DX_ Hyper Battle DVD.

-   : A virtual reality-based Gashat that transforms Ex-Aid into where he creates weapons to attack enemies, such as swords and missiles, via the power of virtual reality. This form is exclusive to _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid the Movie: True Ending_.

-   : A Legend Rider Gashat based on Kamen Rider Build.

During _Kamen Rider × Super Sentai: Ultra Super Hero Taisen_, Emu temporarily assumes the form of the red-colored , a hybrid of Akarenger and the Double Riders, once he and his team prevail in the Game World's Ultra Super Hero Taisen tournament. In this form he rides the Gorengers' original airship, the Variblune, against the Xevious fleet.

Emu Hojo is portrayed by . As a child, Emu is portrayed by .

Poppy Pipopapo/Asuna Karino

is sent from the Ministry of Health to CR as a nurse, acting as the Kamen Riders' navigator and guide. "Asuna" is a guise for her true identity as a Bugster named , based on a video game character from the rhythm game DoReMiFa Beat. Although she reveals her true nature (in "Christmas Special"), Emu and Hiiro are already aware of this, with the latter concluding that her civilian name is an anagram for the Japanese word of .

Like the Bugster executives, Poppy is capable of entering any level selected by the Kamen Riders, of teleportation, and she once influenced Bugster Viruses into her rhythm dance. While the cost for her powers are yet to be revealed she is able to turn a pair of dining cutlery into energy weapons and utilize the power of the Energy Items. She was born from the Bugster infection of Kuroto's mother, , whose life was unintentionally sacrificed in the process due to having an unknown regular illness, thus making Poppy a complete Bugster yet emotionally scarred; Kuroto, even his father Masamune regrets being unable to save her. Sakurako helped her son during his youth at Genm Corp on the Bugster development. Her data was revealed to be sealed inside a Proto Gashat; Sakurako's illness is the reason Kuroto, as well secretly Masamune wants to develop Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashats, in order to cure her regular illness once a player manages to beat Kamen Rider Chronicle's final stage.

After Kuroto's first death, while the Riders are on duty, Poppy comes under the thrall of the Lovrica Bugster and helps Parad complete the Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashat. She then serves as the game's referee & navigator and deals disciplinary action against anyone, including a doctor, who breaks the rules of the game. When Lovrica is defeated, she begins to regain her memories before Emu frees her from the Bugster's brainwashing. However, Poppy considers herself beyond redemption and subjects herself to being hunted by Kamen Rider and Ride-Player alike until Emu reminds her of the good person she has become. Indebted to Emu, memories of Poppy's host Sakurako lead her to a Gamer Driver and the Proto Mighty Action X Origin Gashat which was said to be a failsafe system against the Bugster infection, thus reviving Kuroto as a Bugster. During Masamune's last scheme to initiate a full-scale second Zero Day's Game Disease infection as Gamedeus Cronus, Poppy sacrifices herself by merging her own data with the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat to perfect it and destroy Gamedeus. However, one fragment of Poppy's data was used by Kuroto to restore her.

While Poppy is in her brainwashed state, Ren Amagasaki gives her a and an upgraded version of the Gashacon Bugvisor known as the which she combines into the for her to transform into . Like the original Buggle Driver, inserting the dating simulation-based Gashat into the Buggle Driver II and then pressing the small red button next to its slot allows Poppy to assume . Also, similar to Genm Zombie Gamer Level X, she can remove the Gashacon Bugvisor II from her Bugster Buckle II while Toki Meki Crisis is still intact to use as a weapon. By pressing the B button on the Buggle Driver II twice in succession, Poppy can perform her finisher.

Asuna Karino is portrayed by .

Hiiro Kagami

is a 24-year-old genius surgeon who recently returned from America. He is described as a _tsundere_ with a liking for sweets due to the influence from his late 19-year-old girlfriend, . He has two loyal assistants named and who are nurses at Seito University Hospital. Being a prodigy in the medical field, Hiiro is initially passively hostile towards Emu due to their differing beliefs but grew to respect the intern over time to the point where he adopts some of Emu's beliefs himself. Despite appearing callous, he does care for others, even Emu before the intern earned his respect.

During the first Zero Day Incident, Hiiro's girlfriend Saki was one of those infected, but she kept it secret from Hiiro who unknowingly stressed her out only to learn too late that she was infected, during which Taiga Hanaya failed to defeat Graphite, the Bugster that manifested from her, resulting in her demise. Due to this, Hiiro harbors extreme animosity towards Taiga Hanaya for his failure to save her as well as a burning hatred against Graphite, although he also holds himself at fault. Emu's words snapped him out of his grief during a battle with Graphite, which caused him to start becoming closer with Emu. Eventually, he admits that he was also to blame for stressing Saki, thus reconciling with the unlicensed doctor.

At the height of Kamen Rider Chronicle's crisis, after learning that Saki was among the Bugster victims whose lifeforce was stored as data in the Proto-Gashats, Hiiro was blackmailed into working for Masamune who threatened to delete her data. However, remembering Saki's last words, Hiiro chose to return to CR at the expense of her data. After Masamune's death, Hiiro continues to work on CR, guiding new interns while making peace with his own past. During the events of _Another Ending_, Hiiro is stund to learn that Saki had been revived but she was now under the control of Lovrica Bugster. This cause him to get into a conflict with Taiga, but both eventually worked together to defeat Lovrica and put Saki back to rest. He would later conduct an operation that successfully revives Kiriya back as a human.

Using the role-playing game-based Gashat allows Hiiro to become . His _chibi_-like first form, , wields the buckler-like and can utilize dash attacks while coated in flames. Pulling the Gamer Driver's lever upgrades Brave to his sleeker primary form, . Brave's Gashacon weapon in these and other recent forms is the , which has two modes: Fire and Ice. When activating Taddle Quest, a Game Area is generated which creates several Energy Items with unique power-ups in random treasure chest-like containers.

-   : A rhythm game-based Gashat whose game Poppy originates from that summons the disc jockey-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Taddle Quest before pulling its lever, Brave combines with the Beat Gama to assume where he is equipped with both the phonograph-like on his right arm for music-powered fighting and the speaker-like on his left shoulder for generating energy musical notes. To compensate for his lack of experience in rhythm games, Brave incorporates techniques into his attacks.

-   : A monster-hunting game-based Gashat that summons the dragon-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Taddle Quest before pulling its lever, Brave combines with the Hunter Gama to assume where he is equipped with the sword-like on his right arm for energized slashing.

    -   Brave can also transform into , which combines the abilities and weapons of his and the other Riders' Level 5 forms.

Hiiro later acquires the , an alternate version of the Gashat Gear Dual passed between him and Taiga until Kuroto provides the latter with a second copy for him to use. Similar to its predecessor, the Gashat Gear Dual β is composed of two Gashats for Brave to summon one of two support robots depending on which logo position he rotates its dial to. He then inserts the Gashat Gear Dual β into the Gamer Driver and pulls its lever to combine himself with the summoned Gama to assume a Level 50 form. Each of Brave's forms have a finisher that is activated by closing and pulling the Gamer Driver's lever a second time. However, the Gashat Gear Dual β has a similar side effect as Ex-Aid's Mighty Brothers XX Gashat where it harms the user and causes the Bugster within its corresponding game to completely take over their body if it is used too much, until it no longer affects the user who had been experiencing the side-effects three times.

-   : A tactical role-playing game-based Gashat and updated version of Taddle Quest that summons the wizard-like , which Brave combines with to assume where he is equipped with an enchanted black cape that he can use to attack enemies; he also gains abilities of telekinesis, levitation, generating portals, creating energy projections of swords, and nullifying the power-up effects of Energy Items. Brave's finisher in this form is the , which has two variations: a Rider Kick or an energized slash with the Gashacon Sword.

-   : A naval simulation game-based Gashat and updated version of Bang Bang Shooting used by Snipe.

While being extorted to work for Masamune Dan in exchange for reviving Saki, whom Masamune is holding prisoner, Hiiro is presented with the Japanese role-playing game-based Gashat which can summon the paladin-like support robot. By using this Gashat to transform, Brave combines with the Legacy Gama to assume his ultimate form, , where he is equipped with an enchanted white cape that can increase his power when fighting alongside his allies. He also gains health recovery capabilities (either to heal himself or to refill an ally's Rider Gauge), and the ability to create energy swords that attack enemies. Brave's finishers in this form are enhanced versions of his Level 2 form's Taddle Critical Strike/Finish, which is stronger if one of his allies has been defeated in battle. This Gashat originally belonged to Hiiro's Game World counterpart for accessing Legacy Gamer Level 50.

In other _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid_ media, Brave has access to other Gamer forms that do not appear in the canon of the TV series. These include:

-   : A Legend Game Gashat based on _Family Stadium_ that summons the baseball player-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Taddle Quest before pulling its lever, Brave combines with the Famista Gama to assume where he is equipped with both the on his left hand and the on his left shoulder. This form is exclusive to _Kamen Rider Genm: Legend Gamer Stage_.

-   : A hunting simulation game-based Gashat that summons the wildcat-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Taddle Quest before pulling its lever, Brave combines with the Safari Gama to assume where he is equipped with both the sword-like on his right arm and the railgun-like on his left arm. Unbeknownst to Hiiro, Emu and even Kuroto, this Gashat was created by Foundation X to use the Gamer Driver-based Kamen Riders as experimental subjects for their research on Rider Gashats. This form is exclusive to _Kamen Rider Brave: Survive! The Revived Beast Rider Squad_.

-   : A Legend Game Gashat based on _Galaxian_ that summons the Galaxip-based support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Taddle Quest before pulling its lever, Brave combines with the Galaxian Gama to assume where he is equipped with the on his chest. This Gashat was given to Brave by his Game World counterpart True Brave after defeating him honorably. This form is exclusive to _Kamen Rider × Super Sentai: Ultra Super Hero Taisen_.

Hiiro Kagami is portrayed by .

Haima Kagami

is Hiiro's 55-year-old father, the director of the hospital and in charge of CR.

During the Kamen Rider Chronicle incident, Haima became one of the Ride-Players without his son knowing, wanting to revive Saki for Hiiro's sake.

Haima Kagami is portrayed by .

Kiriya Kujo

is a 27-year-old medical examiner investigating the Bugster incidents out of his own curiosity. He is quite cunning, lying to Emu about the reason he fights in order to gain sympathy from him. Kiriya lost a 22-year-old friend named during Zero Day while researching the origin of the Bugsters. Kiriya informed his friend that he was infected with a Bugster Virus, and Jungo panicked and fled, dying in an automobile accident before the infection ravaged his body, leaving Kiriya to grieve over his friend's body and vow to never again reveal such an awful truth.

Kiriya learns that Kamen Rider Genm is actually Kuroto Dan. However, Genm brutally defeats and hospitalizes him, and Kuroto uses his Bakusou Bike Gashat and VR system to psychologically torture him, threatening Kiriya to not expose his identity to the other Riders, though this does not deter Kiriya. However, Kuroto and Parad's scheming causes confusion about Genm's identity while worsening Kiriya's reputation with the other Riders, except for Emu who has a better understanding of Kiriya's duplicity. Untrusted, Kiriya works alone to deduce Kuroto's reasons for working with the Bugsters. After learning of Kyotaro Hinata's operation on Emu, Kiriya starts to doubt his trust in Kyotaro. He ultimately fights alongside Emu against Genm. The others' trust in him is restored when Genm reveals his identity as Kuroto and his plan on using the Riders to do his dirty work. Kiriya and three other doctor Riders fail to stop Kuroto's plan as he succeeds in completing the Dangerous Zombie Gashat.

Becoming concerned over Kuroto's real motive, Kiriya decides to visit Kuroto's father, the former CEO of Genm Corp., Masamune Dan, to learn more. Kiriya then decides to gather all the Riders so he can share this information, only to be incepted by Kuroto who tricks him into inserting the Dangerous Zombie Gashat into his Gamer Driver, leaving Kiriya weakened by the Gashat draining his Rider Gauge to 10%. Kuroto then fatally wounds Kiriya as Genm Zombie Gamer Level X while taking his Giri Giri Chambara Gashat for himself. Before his body completely dissipates into nothingness, a dying Kiriya gives Emu his Gamer Driver and Bakusou Bike Gashat as mementos while telling Emu that he is capable of changing his own fate.

Before his death, Kiriya left his research toward a cure for the Bugster infection to his colleague, Yoshitaka, which is later given to Hiiro, then Taiga and Tsukuru – at the same time these two are developing the ultimate Rider Gashat cure. However, the Gashat only works with Riders who have a natural Bugster antibody like Emu. Eventually, Emu manages to complete the creation of the ultimate Rider Gashat cure called Maximum Mighty X.

In the film _Ultra Super Hero Taisen_, the Game World counterpart of Kiriya temporarily appears with other Kamen Rider and Super Sentai heroes, including Hiiro's game-world counterpart Kamen Rider True Brave. With the intent of defending the real world from the enemies that ride Andor Genesis spaceships from _Xevious_ game attacking the Earth, they held a battle royale tournament between five members of each team on Eito Kirino's Ultra Super Hero Taisen game.

In _Kamen Sentai Gorider_, it is revealed that the revival of Kiriya and three other deceased Riders (Another Agito, Baron and Marika) was actually a ploy by Kuroto, who had been disguising himself as Kazuma Kenzaki to lure Ex-Aid into the Game World until the real Kenzaki arrived. Due to Kenzaki currently being an Undead and the only Joker in the Game World, the Undead Battle Fight rules apply to said world which leads to its destruction. Lazer and the other four Riders are then given Gorider cards by Ex-Aid, with Lazer transforming into the yellow-colored to defeat Genm. As Genm's anger caused him to create a giant space warp to kill Ex-Aid and Blade, Lazer, accompanied by Another Agito, Baron and Marika, sacrifice their lives to stop Genm while the two living Riders manage to escape back to the real world.

During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, Kiriya is revived as a Bugster by Masamune. Though he claimed to have sided with Masamune out of disappointment with Emu, he was secretly working against him, with Emu quickly catching on to his plan and playing along. This allows Kiriya to keep tabs on Masamune, the true mastermind behind Bugster events, and learns of his endgame before revealing his true allegiance. After Kiriya intentionally had Kuroto create the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat, using the samples from their Bugster bodies and Gamedeus' virus to counter Gamedeus, he quickly dispatches Kuroto to the authorities for his sins as Masamune's unwitting pawn and delivers the Gashat to Ex-Aid. For his efforts, Kiriya is nominated an official member of CR. Later Kiriya becomes one of Gamedeus Cronus' Bugster-zombified victims until Poppy sacrifices her physical body to fuse with Doctor Mighty XX in order to cure those zombified. Following Masamune's reign of terror, Kiriya becomes a collaborator for the newest Genm Corp CEO, Tsukuru Koboshi, to develop new Game Disease vaccines such as reviving the sealed Zero Day victims back to life from Proto Gashats.

Using the racing game-based Gashat allows Kiriya to become . His _chibi_-like first form, , wields both the knuckle-like for close range combat and the blaster-like for long range combat, and can utilize spin attacks. Pulling the Gamer Driver's lever upgrades Lazer to his motorcycle-like primary form, , which Ex-Aid can use as his vehicle. When activating Bakusou Bike, a Game Area is generated which creates several Energy Items with unique power-ups in random trophy stand-like containers. Due to the limitations of his Level 2 form, Lazer requires a partner to use his Kimewaza Slot Holder for him, such as activating its function to change the Game Area's location and inserting a Gashat into it to perform his critical strike. However, on his own, he is capable of moving around without a passenger and willing the Gamer Driver's lever to flip back into place to revert himself to his Level 1 form so that he can deactivate his transformation. Upon Kiriya's death, after giving both his Gamer Driver and Bakusou Bike Gashat to Emu as mementos, Ex-Aid can use this Gashat to summon the Bike Gama (originally Lazer's Level 2 form) and later uses Kiriya's Gamer Driver.

-   : A hack and slash-based Gashat that summons the Japanese samurai-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Bakusou Bike before pulling its lever, Lazer combines with the Chambara Gama to assume where he changes into a humanoid form. His Gashacon weapon in this form is the , which has two modes: Arrow and Sickle. Genm steals this Gashat from Lazer shortly before killing him, and Ex-Aid claims it after defeating Genm with Maximum Gamer Level 99, Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50, and Brave Hunter Quest Gamer Level 5 (Full Dragon).

-   : A monster-hunting game-based Gashat that summons the dragon-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Bakusou Bike before pulling its lever, Lazer combines with the Hunter Gama to assume where he changes into a humanoid form equipped with the wrist guard-like which consists of the sword-like on his right arm for close range combat and the railgun-like on his left arm for long range combat. This form is lost following Lazer's death by Genm.

Revived by Masamune and pretending to be his servant, Kiriya uses the Bakusou Bike Gashat to transform into . His primary form is , a humanoid version of Bike Gamer Level 2, where he is capable of nullifying the effects of a Bugster Virus. He can wield the Gashacon Sparrow as his Gashacon weapon if the Giri Giri Chambara Gashat is in his possession.

-   : A beta-test Gashat that summons the bicycle-like for Lazer Turbo to ride upon. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Bakusou Bike before pulling its lever, he combines with the Proto Sports Gama to assume where he is equipped with the disc-like on his shoulders for projectile throwing.

-   : A beta-test Gashat that summons the fighter aircraft-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Bakusou Bike before pulling its lever, Lazer Turbo combines with the Proto Combat Gama to assume where he is equipped with both the jetpack-like for flying capabilities and the cannon-like on his sides for rapid firepower.

In _Another Ending_, entrusted by the redeemed dying Masamune to stop Kuroto from bringing apocalypse to the entire universe, Lazer uses the Buggle Driver II and Giri Giri Chambara Gashat to transform into a blue-colored version of Chambara Bike Gamer Level 3 known as . Like Poppy, he can perform the Critical Crews-Aid by pressing the B button on the Buggle Driver II twice in succession. He successfully defeats Kuroto, but both ended up receiving a Game Over as Kiriya would have dissipated with Kuroto when a redeemed Saiko uses her research data to restore his humanity in an operation performed by Hiiro.

Prior his revival in the series, Kiriya's death had become a popular hashtag in Japan's Twitter feed under the slogan, based on the advertising slogan of the animated movie _Grave of the Fireflies_. Toei Company took note of this and quickly sent an apology.[1]

Kiriya Kujo is portrayed by .

Kyotaro Hinata

is the 52-year-old Deputy Director-General of the Ministry of Health and a former doctor. 16 years ago, he performed a life-saving surgery on Emu. It is suggested that this surgery might have something to do with Emu's Gamer Driver compatibility. Kyotaro became Dark Graphite's victim, giving birth to a giant dragon Bugster which later becomes the Hunter Gamer. Due to his life-link with Graphite, Kyotaro must remain calm from the virus' high stresses until the doctor Riders in their Hunter Gamer destroyed Graphite. Upon learning that Kuroto is Genm and had been allying with Bugsters, Kyotaro orders his arrest and seeks a replacement CEO for Genm Corp. However, the company commercially releases Kamen Rider Chronicle, completed by Parad, which transforms civilians into Ride-Players who are turned against the Kamen Riders. In the chaos as the population come into the conflict, Kyotaro announces to the public the truth of the Zero Day incidents and asks that the fight be entrusted to the doctor Riders. Kyotaro's men learn that the Proto Gashat contains the souls of Bugsters' former hosts, promising a way to revive them. The Proto Gashats under his protection are stolen and held hostage by Masamune, and later recovered by Kiriya Kujo.

Kyotaro Hinata is portrayed by .

Saiko Yaotome

is a 32-year-old researcher of the hospital's Regenerative Medicine Center and an authority on gene therapy, researching a means to restore those who disappeared after succumbing to the Game Disease. She uses the , a version of the Gashacon Bugvisor with a built-in life simulation game titled which was co-developed with the Genm Corporation. Saiko is later revealed to the biological daughter of the Next Genome Institute's leader Michihiko Zaizen, carrying out her father's work while seeking to avenge his death at the hands of the Doctor Riders by aiding Kuroto. While claiming that saving the victims of the Bugster Virus was a cover, Saiko express remorse for her actions upon learning that Kuroto exploited her skills for his agenda. Saiko is saved by Kiriya, helping the other Riders develop a cure for the Zombie Gamers which Kuroto had unleashed while using her research to restore Kiriya to fully living human.

Saiko Yaotome is portrayed by .


Taiga Hanaya

is a 29-year-old unlicensed radiologist, the oldest of the main Riders, who is known as the . Five years ago, he was a genius radiologist in Seito University Hospital's radiology department who was chosen to be a Kamen Rider for CR after detecting the Bugster Viruses in one of his patients. He initially refused to be a Kamen Rider due to his many responsibilities until his 27-year-old partner, , attempted to use the Gamer Driver and Proto Bang Bang Shooting Gashat. Maki suffered massive injuries and Taiga became a Kamen Rider in his place. After failing to defeat Graphite and save patient Saki Momose, Taiga angrily left Seito and his medical license was revoked. He continued working illegally by opening a medical practice in an abandoned hospital, while training to immunize himself from the side effects of any future Gashats. After seeing Ex-Aid and Brave, he buys another Gamer Driver and Gashat directly from Kuroto Dan. Initially acting hostile towards other Riders (Ex-Aid and Brave) due to his intent on taking their Gashats and trying to take the burden of a Rider for himself, he gradually came to accept them. He also felt great shame and regret at failing to save Hiiro's girlfriend Saki, deliberately antagonizing Hiiro because he believed he deserve the latter's hostility, but the two eventually reconciled.

Seeing the threat posed by Genm's Zombie Gamer, Taiga sought Tsukuru's help to create a Gashat as a countermeasure, which becomes Maximum Mighty X in Emu's hands. At the height of Kamen Rider Chronicle, Taiga assisted Nico in clearing the game and formed an alliance with CR to stop Masamune's plans in distributing Kamen Rider Chronicle. After the final battle, Taiga acknowledges his participation and regains his medical licence from the Ministry of Health, opening a hospital to treat Game Disease.

Using the shooter game-based Gashat allows Taiga to become . His _chibi_-like first form, , can utilize an attack where he turns into a large energy bullet before launching himself at enemies. Pulling the Gamer Driver's lever upgrades Snipe to his sleeker primary form, . Snipe's Gashacon weapon in these and other recent forms is the , which has two modes: Handgun and Rifle. When activating Bang Bang Shooting, a Game Area is generated which creates several Energy Items with unique power-ups in random metallic barrel-like containers.

-   : A shoot 'em up-based Gashat that summons the fighter aircraft-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Bang Bang Shooting before pulling its lever, Snipe combines with the Combat Gama to assume where he is equipped with both the jetpack-like for flying capabilities and the cannon-like on his sides for rapid firepower.

-   : A monster-hunting game-based Gashat that summons the dragon-like for battle. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Bang Bang Shooting before pulling its lever, Snipe combines with the Hunter Gama to assume where he is equipped with the railgun-like on his left arm for shooting electricity.

    -   Snipe can also transform into , which combines the abilities and weapons of his and the other Riders' Level 5 forms.

Originally, Taiga transformed into Snipe using the beta-test Gashat until he experienced side effects which almost consumed his mind and was defeated by Graphite five years ago.

Taiga later acquires the , an alternate version of the Gashat Gear Dual passed between Taiga and Hiiro until Kuroto provides Taiga with a second copy to use. Similar to its predecessor, the Gashat Gear Dual β is composed of two Gashats for Snipe to summon one of two support robots depending on which logo position he rotates its dial to. He then inserts the Gashat Gear Dual β into the Gamer Driver and pulls its lever to combine himself with the summoned Gama to assume a Level 50 form. Each of Snipe's forms have a finisher that is activated by closing and pulling the Gamer Driver's lever a second time. However, similar to Ex-Aid's Mighty Brothers XX, using Gashat Gear Dual β too often can cause the Bugster within the game to completely take over his body. Unlike Hiiro, Taiga had previously experienced a similar side effect when he used a Proto Gashat during the first Zero Day and had since trained to immunize himself from such.

-   : A naval simulation game-based Gashat and updated version of Bang Bang Shooting that summons the battleship-like , with which Snipe combines to assume where he is equipped with both the howitzer-like on his arms and the gun turret-like on his upper body for destructive firepower. He also gains enhanced target accuracy. Snipe's finisher in this form is the , which has two variations: a Rider Kick or an energized barrage from all of his armaments.

-   : A tactical role-playing game-based Gashat and updated version of Taddle Quest used by Brave.

During Masamune's last-ditch effort as Gamedeus Cronus and his kidnapping of Nico, Taiga temporarily transforms into Kamen Rider Cronus by inserting two Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashats into his Gamer Driver but Gamedeus Cronus' fusion was too powerful for the Riders.

In other _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid_ media, Snipe has access to other Gamer forms that do not appear in the canon of the TV series. These include:

-   : A Legend Game Gashat based on _Xevious_ that summons the spacecraft-like support robot. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Bang Bang Shooting before pulling its lever, Snipe combines with the Xevious Gama to assume where he is equipped with both the jetpack-like for flying capabilities and the cannon-like on his sides for rapid firepower. This form is exclusive to _Kamen Rider Genm: Legend Gamer Stage_.

-   : An artillery game-based Gashat exclusive to _Kamen Rider Snipe: Episode Zero_.

Taiga Hanaya is portrayed by .


Nico Saiba

, also known by her gaming tag of "N", is an 18-year-old professional-fighting-games player who suddenly appears before Taiga. A tomboy, she is evidently a sore loser and holds a grudge against Emu because she lost to him in a _Tekken_ tournament in 2010, despite Emu's encouragement. After introducing herself to Taiga, she attaches herself to him and starts frequenting his hospital, much to his annoyance. In the height of Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, Nico participated as Ride-Player Nico to clear the game and learned that her true rival in the past was Parad, who was possessing Emu as "M". As she advanced towards the high-tier bosses and Gamedeus, Nico was subjected to Masamune's plots, and might have been killed without the intervention of Taiga and the CR. After Masamune's death, Nico resumed her high-school education and, after graduating, attempted to become Taiga's hospital assistant. She invested most of her savings in the stocks of Genm Corp. to save the company.

During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, Nico becomes . In contrast to the other Ride-Players, Nico customized her appearance with her civilian form's accessories such as her hat and backpack. Her gaming strategies enable her to defeat the Bugsters by exploiting the environments, adapting to mismatched strength or weaponry.

Nico Saiba is portrayed by . As a 12-year-old girl, Nico is portrayed by .


Genm Corp.

The is a game company which provides the technologies for producing the Gamer Driver and the Rider Gashats. Genm Corp. was founded by Masamune's son, Kuroto, who was involved in the discovery of the Bugster Virus and the special surgery on Emu Hojo. After Emu's surgery, Kuroto planned to compromise Genm Corp. by observing Emu for 10 years when he contact Next Genome to breed the matured Bugsters from Emu's body, then used some of remaining Bugster Viruses out of Emu's body to unleash the first Zero Day in 2011; he framed his father for this, and was thus able to take over the company. After Kuroto, known as Kamen Rider Genm, is revealed to be the mastermind behind the Zero Day outbreak, Genm Corp. has a financial crisis until the new mysterious CEO Ren Amagasaki arrives to revive the company with the in-house developer Tsukuru. The company was temporarily comprised by Kuroto's return, until Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99 rendered Kuroto powerless from being a Rider anymore, though his former ally Parad and the Bugsters took control of the company. Masamune, revealed to have been overseeing Gemn Corp's agenda from prison, retakes his position as CEO until his death, when Tsukuru Koboshi takes over.

Kuroto Dan

is the 30-year-old CEO of Genm Corp. and son of the company's previous CEO Masamune, a calm and polite person who is actually a cold-blooded and manipulative narcissist who believes his intelligence is something to be feared. As a teenager he created games for his father, developing a grudge against a young Emu who sent in brilliant ideas for games which challenged Kuroto's belief that only he was capable of making great games. He was among the first people to learn of the Bugster Virus in 2000, having infected Emu to study for a decade before extracting most of the virus to orchestrate Zero Day with prototypes of the Rider Gashats known as .But Kuroto lost his sanity when his mother, who helped him in a Bugster development project where he hid a Gamer Driver and the Proto Mighty Action X Origin Gashat as a failsafe, succumbed to an accidental Bugster infection. This influenced Kuroto to cause the Zero Day epidemic of 2010, framing his father to take over the company while unaware that he was being manipulated by his father. While Kuroto developed CR and the Kamen Rider systems for the Ministry of Health to combat the Bugsters, he allied himself with the monsters while interfering with the Riders' battles as . His goal was to use the Gashats' completed data to create a Gashat containing "The Ultimate Game": a global augmented reality massively multiplayer online game death battle called . While claiming himself as Kamen Rider Chronicle's "Game Master", Kuroto's actual goal later revealed is to resurrect his mother. He helps the Riders only when it comes to threats to his agenda, such as when he helped Kamen Riders Specter and Necrom against the Great Eyeser's Gammas in the finale of _Kamen Rider Ghost_.

In the _Heisei Generations_ movie, Kuroto allowed the Next Genome Institute to take over Genm Corp. while he secretly recorded their battle data to create a "forbidden game"; this allows him to summon digitized versions of Kamen Riders Wizard, Gaim and Drive via the Ganbarizing Gashat. This continued in _Tricks_ where he creates the Legend Rider Gashats to gather data in order to upgrade his Ganbarizing Gashat and summons digitized versions of Kamen Riders Double, OOO, and Fourze. However, a new Dr. Pac-Man (later secretly revealed to be Parad in disguise) emerges and rescues Emu while assisting the other two doctor Riders against Genm and his summoned Riders. It is then revealed that Kuroto contacted Next Genome to use Emu's body on Zero Day and framed his father Masamune once Emu's condition went into a coma-state after his exhaustion from winning the _Tekken_ tournament in 2010.

As Genm, Kuroto forces Ex-Aid to complete the Shakariki Sports Gashat's data by targeting Poppy and one of Emu's patients. With ten of the Gashats' data cleared, it allowed Kuroto to survive Ex-Aid's attack by transferring the data of his "death" into the Dangerous Zombie Gashat. He would then become a Level X version of Genm. Kuroto is later exposed for murdering Kiriya, as an attempt to conceal his identity, and becomes a fugitive while continuing to relieve the Kamen Riders of their Gashats. When the Ministry of Health finds his hideout, Kuroto infects himself with the Charlie Bugster and tricked Emu to evade arrest, obtaining the refined Shakariki Sports Gashat while corroding Emu's Gamer Driver beyond use. However, Emu uses Kiriya's Gamer Driver in combination with the Maximum Mighty X Gashat and reprograms Genm's data to render his Zombie Gamer form vulnerable to defeat by the Kamen Riders. After the fight, Kuroto is killed by Parad who takes his Gashacon Bugvisor and Dangerous Zombie Gashat.

In _Kamen Sentai Gorider_ it is revealed that Kuroto had a backup plan by inserting himself into an unbeatable game. He disguised himself as Kazuma Kenzaki in order to fool Emu and four revived Riders (Another Agito, Baron, Marika, and Lazer) into entering an impossible game for one sole purpose: gathering the despair of dead Kamen Riders to power his own resurrection. Kuroto's plan was foiled by the appearance of the real Kenzaki, who was attracted by the undead powers, and who destroyed the Game World. Kuroto is able to transform into Genm and gets upgraded by Totema via the gathered despair, only to be beaten by Ex-Aid and the Goriders. His anger leads him to create a space warp in an attempt to destroy Ex-Aid and Blade, but he is stopped by the revived Riders who sacrifice themselves to allow Emu and Kenzaki to escape.

Poppy, as the Bugster created from Kuroto's mother, used her former host's memories to revive Kuroto, albeit as a Bugster with 100 extra lives while christening himself , as he joins forces with the Doctor Riders initially to exact revenge on Parad while Poppy managed to help him regain a sense of humanity with achieving the revival of the Bugsters' deceased hosts, including Kiriya Kujo. When Masamune resumes as Gemn Corp's CEO, Kuroto realizes his father manipulated and wished to have realized it sooner so he could had killed him rather than framing him. After Masamune manipulates Hiiro into betraying Kuroto, Kuroto creates the Hyper Muteki Gashat in order to transform into Muteki Gamer as a countermeasure against Cronus and his unwitting pawns. After all Bugster components from Kamen Rider Chronicle are defeated, giving Gamedeus a physical manifestation into the real world and unleashing a full-scale Game Disease pandemic, Kuroto creates the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat as a countermeasure to cure all Game Disease victims and weaken Gamedeus. However, the Gashat's creation had been Kiriya's master plan from the start, reversing Gamedeus' virus into a vaccine in his body. Once the Gashat is finished, Kiriya apprehended Kuroto into the Gashacon Bugvisor II and handed him over to the authorities. While imprisoned yet advising the CR, Kuroto changed his name to to reflect his god complex. ( is a Sino-Japanese reading of the kanji . He later returned to CR, learning that Doctor Mighty XX's power wasn't enough to negate Gamedeus Cronus' infection of each victim. During an escape from the Bugster zombified victims, Kuroto is rescued by Kamen Rider Build, who mistakes him for Ex-Aid like the Riders from _Kamen Rider Ghost_. Though Poppy sacrificed her physical body by merging her data into the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat to stop the Gamedeus epidemic, Kuroto acquires a fragment of the Bugster's data at the time and later uses it to recreate Poppy in his cell.

In _Another Ending_, Kuroto returns to a life of crime and attempts to initiate a universal apocalypse through a multiplayer survival horror-based game called . He was ultimately defeated by Kiriya Kujo while on his last life, regaining his sanity and morality while disappearing permanently, though his spirit later appears a fully restored Kiriya for a brief moment while giving him a friendly smirk.

Using the beta-test Gashat allows Kuroto to become Kamen Rider Genm, a dark version of Ex-Aid who is stronger than him due to using a Proto Gashat which has unlimited powers, but also a side effect of harming the user's body from prolonged use. His _chibi_-like first form, , can utilize agile attacks. Pulling the Gamer Driver's lever upgrades Genm to his sleeker primary form, . Genm's Gashacon weapon in these and other recent forms is the , which has three modes: Pad, Beam Gun, and Chainsaw. The Gashacon Bugvisor can absorb a defeated Bugster's data and trap them within it. When activating Proto Mighty Action X, a Game Area is generated which creates several Energy Items with unique power-ups in random chocolate block-like containers. Before his identity as Genm was revealed, Kuroto utilized a voice scrambler whenever he spoke and was only referred to as by the other Riders. At one point, Kamen Rider Ghost mistook Ex-Aid for Genm due to their similar appearances.

-   : A sports game-based Gashat that summons the bicycle-like for Genm to ride upon. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Proto Mighty Action X before pulling its lever, he combines with the Sports Gama to assume where he is equipped with the disc-like on his shoulders for projectile throwing. Ex-Aid obtains this Gashat after defeating Genm with Hunter Action Gamer Level 5 (Dragon Fang).

Later on, Kuroto manages to complete the survival horror-based Gashat. To use it, he combines the Gashacon Bugvisor with the to create the . Inserting this Gashat into the Buggle Driver and then pressing the small red button next to its slot transforms Genm into . When activating Dangerous Zombie, Kuroto can summon zombie-themed Bugster Viruses. If a Rider inserts this Gashat into their Gamer Driver, it will inflict damage to them by depleting their Rider Gauge to 10%. Genm can remove the Gashacon Bugvisor from his Bugster Buckle while Dangerous Zombie is still intact to absorb the virus essences of a defeated Bugster. As this Gashat's power is based on fictional zombies, Genm is capable of regenerating from any injuries he may receive. His Rider Gauge also remains empty, allowing him to circumvent death from its side effect – until it is refilled by Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99 to remove his immortality. By simultaneously pressing the A and B buttons on the Buggle Driver followed by pressing one of them a second time, Genm can perform one of two finishers: via the A button or via the B button. Level X's power is designated as "unknown", implied to be either more powerful than any other levels or the lowest. Genm allowed the other Riders to beat him so he can absorb more "death" data to obtain Level X's true power, allowing him to become .

-   : A hack and slash-based Gashat that originally belonged to Lazer until Genm killed him and stole it. While in Genm's possession, he is capable of summoning the Gashacon Sparrow. Ex-Aid obtains this Gashat after defeating Genm with Maximum Gamer Level 99, Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50, and Brave Hunter Quest Gamer Level 5 (Full Dragon).

-   : A role-playing game-based Gashat that belongs to Brave and was stolen by Genm (along with DoReMiFa Beat). While in his possession, he is capable of summoning the Gashacon Sword. Brave regains this Gashat along with Drago Knight Hunter Z after defeating Genm with Fantasy Gamer Level 50.

-   : A rhythm game-based Gashat from which Poppy originates, that belongs to Brave and was stolen by Genm (along with Taddle Quest). Brave regains this Gashat after defeating Genm with Hunter Quest Gamer Level 5 (Full Dragon), Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99, and Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50.

-   : A cooking game-based Gashat that originally belonged to Ex-Aid until Para-DX defeated him and gave it to Genm. It is unknown if Parad stole this Gashat after killing Kuroto with the Gashacon Bugvisor.

-   : A shooter game-based Gashat that belongs to Snipe and was stolen by Genm (along with Jet Combat and Drago Knight Hunter Z). While in Genm's possession, he is capable of summoning the Gashacon Magnum. Snipe regains this Gashat after defeating Genm with Simulation Gamer Level 50.

-   : A shoot 'em up-based Gashat that belongs to Snipe and was stolen by Genm (along with Bang Bang Shooting and Drago Knight Hunter Z). Snipe regains this Gashat after defeating Genm with Simulation Gamer Level 50, Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99, and Brave Hunter Quest Gamer Level 5 (Full Dragon).

-   : A monster-hunting game-based Gashat that is passed between Ex-Aid, Brave and Snipe, and was stolen by Genm (along with Bang Bang Shooting and Jet Combat). Brave regains this Gashat along with Taddle Quest after defeating Genm with Fantasy Gamer Level 50.

In desperation to save Emu from Parad, Poppy revives Kuroto by using a spare Gamer Driver and a special version of the Proto Mighty Action X Gashat known as on a Bugster Virus with his data which grants him9 lives and the ability to produce a clone of himself whenever he receives a Game Over. This Gashat allows Genm to transform into where he is capable of both nullifying the effects of a Bugster Virus and weakening the higher levels of a Rider. His Gashacon weapons in this form are the Gashacon Bugvisor II, in place of the original version, and the Gashacon Breaker.

-   After regaining his Dangerous Zombie Gashat from Para-DX, Genm can assume , a form similar to the Buggle Driver-based Zombie Gamer Level X, by inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Proto Mighty Action X Origin before pulling its lever. Due to the Proto Mighty Action X Origin Gashat's abilities, it negates the Dangerous Zombie Gashat's side effects on the Gamer Driver which makes this form even more powerful than Zombie Gamer Level X when Genm first used Dangerous Zombie with the Buggle Driver.

In other _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid_ media, Genm has access to other Gamer forms that do not appear in the canon of the TV series. These include:

-   : A Legend Rider Gashat based on Kamen Rider Wizard that allows Genm to transform into the _chibi_-like , as well as upgrade to the sleeker by pulling the Gamer Driver's lever. However, due to his primary form using a Proto Gashat, the levels of Genm's Legend Rider forms are each unique: Wizard Gamer Level 1 remains the same as Action Gamer Level 1, except Genm wears a mask of Wizard's face, while Wizard Gamer Level 2 retains some of the bodysuit parts from Action Gamer Level 2, except Genm's helmet and chest armor resemble Wizard's. In these forms, he is armed with the Wizarswordgun. Genm's critical strike in his Level 2 form is a variation of the Strike Wizard (Wizard's Rider Kick). These forms are exclusive to _Kamen Rider Genm: Legend Rider Stage_.

-   : A Legend Game Gashat based on Kamen Rider Battle: Ganbaride exclusive to _Kamen Rider Genm: Final Legend Stage_.

-   : A beta-test Gashat that summons the bicycle-like for Genm to ride upon. By inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver alongside Proto Mighty Action X before pulling its lever, he combines with the Proto Sports Gama to assume where he is equipped with the Trick Flywheels on his shoulders for projectile throwing. This form is exclusive to the _Kamen Rider Lazer_ Hyper Battle DVD.

After returning to his villainous way in _Another Ending_, Kuroto creates the mecha simulation game-based Gashat. Inserting this Gashat into the Gamer Driver and then pulling its lever transforms Genm into his Level 0 form and summons the armored suit-like , which resembles his Level 1 form. Pressing its top button afterwards combines Genm with the God Maximum Gama to assume where he gains godlike abilities such as controlling planets or the sun. By closing and pulling the Gamer Driver's lever a second time, Genm can perform his finisher.

Kuroto Dan is portrayed by , who is a licensed pharmacist. As a teenager, Kuroto is portrayed by . Iwanaga's portrayal of Kuroto throughout the series, especially after his character's descent to insanity and eventual revival as a comical maniac, proved highly popular among audiences.

Masamune Dan

is the 55-year-old original CEO of Genm Corp and the father of Kuroto Dan, ultimately revealed to have orchestrated his son's schemes as he wanted to revived Sakurako after she succumbed to her Bugster infection. He and his son had volunteered on Kyotaro Hinata's past surgery on Emu. By the start of the series, having secretly made himself a patient zero of the Bugster Virus and developing a god complex, Masamune was imprisoned after allowing his son to use him as a scapegoat for the Zero Day incident in 2010 so his virus can be properly incubated. During that time, Masamune is visited by Kiriya Kujo whom he revealed the nature of Emu's medical history in Kyotaro's surgery and Next Genome in relation to Zero Day, and then by Emu whom he revealed how Kuroto learned of the Bugster virus. Once released after being cleared of all charges, his son and the other Riders and Bugsters having fulfilled their roles in completing Kamen Rider Chronicle, Masamune reclaims his position as CEO of Genm Corp and commercially releases the game.

His master plan is to mass-produce Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashats and release them worldwide, with many of the players killed and turned into data. Masamune had dealings with Machina Visions until its CEO, Johnny Maxima, abandoned work on Kamen Rider Chronicle to develop virtual reality (VR). Masamune also had Gamedeus reprogrammed to do his bidding behind Kuroto's back. When the CR developed a means to defeat Gamedeus and end Kamen Rider Chronicle, Masamune absorbs the Bugster and transforms into . He then fortified the Gamedeus virus to cause a citywide epidemic until Poppy sacrifices herself to enhance the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat for Parad to use in extracting Gamedeus from Masamune, allowing them to be destroyed. Though Masamune lost Gamedeus, he takes out his revenge on the Kamen Riders until Emu breaks free from a time freeze and damages Masamune's Bugvisor. Defeated, Masamune eagerly commits suicide by subjecting himself to his Gashat's virus, taking the Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashat with him to prevent the Riders from freeing the Game Disease victims from the Proto Gashats.

In _Another Ending_, Masamune was revealed to have been revived by Kuroto while forced to develop Zombie Chronicle and serve as a host incubator for the Bugster Virus which Another Parad was created from. As Kuroto succeeds in creating God Maximum Mighty X, Masamune managed to free himself and is fatally wounded in an attempt to atone for his actions and his son's. Found by Kiriya, Masamune reveals the truth of what drove him and his son to madness while giving the doctor his Buggle Driver II.

Masamune uses the Buggle Driver II and a master copy of the Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashat to transform into . His primary form, , possesses an ability known as that allows him to manipulate time by simultaneously pressing the A and B buttons on the Buggle Driver II. According to Kuroto, Cronus' Pause ability is the only way to defeat Gamedeus. According to Lovrica, humans with a compatibility surgery would lose their lives should they attempt to use the Buggle Driver II as only humans infused with the original Bugster Virus via injection, or from being infected, can properly use it. By pressing the A and B buttons on the Gashacon Bugvisor II in a specific order, Cronus can perform one of two finishers: via Beam Gun Mode after pressing B and then A or via Chainsaw Mode after pressing A and then B. Like Poppy, he can also perform the Critical Crews-Aid by pressing the B button on the Buggle Driver II twice in succession. Since he possesses the master Gashat of Kamen Rider Chronicle, Masamune can either manipulate or erase the lives of Bugsters to control the casualties of Ride-Players and ensure its popularity. By utilizing the power of the Bugster virus within him at maximum, Masamune can activate a secondary ability of the Gashacon Bugvisor II known as where he reverses the timestream of the Gashats, such as erasing Hyper Muteki from existence, by pressing and holding the B button. However, the Reset won't work on Save Energy Items which eventually led to the return of Hyper Muteki. As Gamedeus Cronus, he wields Gamedeus' DeuSlasher and Deus Rampart, which he uses even after losing his Gamedeus Cronus form, and assumes the Bugster's form that has the extendable arms and the sword-like leg.

Masamune Dan is portrayed by .

Tsukuru Koboshi

is a 45-year-old video game developer who was on the Genm Corp. project team developing the Rider Gashats for five years. The company began to suffer financially after the sudden disappearance of his boss, Kuroto Dan, and Tsukuru tried to keep the company afloat by releasing new game Ju Ju Burger. Supported by other employees, Tsukuru led the development team under a new CEO, later revealed to be Ren Amagasaki, who is secretly the Bugster Lovrica working for Parad. They complete another game but it is corrupted with the Bugster Virus and Tsukuru is infected, with the Burgermon Bugster emerging from him. When he realized it was the likeness of his creation, Burgermon, he embraced his creation and became friends with the Bugster, which looked after him whenever the Game Disease made Tsukuru feel sick. Tsukuru developed the Ju Ju Burger Gashat using Kuroto's private terminals, in case he ever needed to go to CR to discuss his unique case.

Burgermon caused a panic by going outside while hungry and was chased by Emu. Tsukuru intervened and tried to satisfy Burgermon by feeding him burgers with help from Ex-Aid Burger Action Gamer Level 4. Tusukuru became stressed and started to fade when the doctor Riders tried destroying Burgermon but recovered when Ex-Aid saved the Bugster. Later, Tsukuru witnessed the destruction of Burgermon by Genm Zombie Gamer Level X, his former boss who also confiscated the Gashat.

While mourning Burgermon, Kuroto sprays Tsukuru with a Bugster Virus from his Gashacon Bugvisor, causing the Motors Bugster to manifest and attack Tsukuru's supporters in the company while also acting as bait for Ex-Aid. Returning to the CR, Tsukuru explains that when Kuroto became a fugitive, Genm Corp. went into a leadership crisis until the new CEO named Ren Amagasaki arrived. After Genm kills Motors, Tsukuru awakens and is quickly cured.

Before Genm's invasion of Genm Corp., Taiga later uses the memory of Burgermon's death by Genm and a significant amount of money to recruit Tsukuru into making a Gashat for a game about killing zombies as he believes that it would be the key to countering the Dangerous Zombie Gashat. This leads to the development of Maximum Mighty X. Following Masamune's death, Tsukuru becomes the new CEO of Genm Corp., appointed by majority shareholder Nico, and Burgermon becomes a company mascot alongside Mighty.

Tsukuru Koboshi is portrayed by .


Bugsters

The are micro-sized computer viruses known as that aim to destroy humanity in order to rule the world. Their origin is traced to the Year 2000 problem as an unexpected effect of the millennium turnover. Kuroto was the first person to discover the virus in his laptop. In 2011, Kuroto initiated Zero Day by spreading the virus and then framing his father, Masamune Dan, for the crime, which allowed him to rise as CEO of Genm Corp. However, this was actually planned by Masamune who secretly controlled the company from prison until Kamen Rider Chronicle was developed and both Riders and Bugsters engaged in battle.

The Bugster themselves originate from the Bugster Virus, which are developed by infecting a human. Inside the infected human, they use the host's negative stresses in order to take control of them and become giant monsters known as . Once a Rider extracts the virus from their host in their Level 1 form, the virus manifests into a Bugster monster and is accompanied by a few Bugster Virus foot soldiers in various attire. The host body, though restored to normal, will gradually suffer the effects of a and can only be saved by quickly defeating the Bugster causing it, whether by destroying or sparing it. Otherwise, if Game Disease runs its course, the host disappears permanently and the Bugsters born from the host's body will gain a full manifestation, such as gaining human disguises. While Bugsters have manifested, the host's life force is slowly sapped. Negative stresses in the host can result in the appearance of additional Bugster Viruses and in some cases another copy of the Bugster monster. However, this can be counteracted by the host overcoming their negative stresses. If a Bugster's physical body is destroyed without having their essence absorbed into the Gashacon Bugvisor, they will die permanently. Only the fully manifested Bugsters like Graphite can be revived without having their virus debris being absorbed into the Gashacon Bugvisor, thus having an immortality resurrection.

It is revealed in the _Heisei Generation_ film that the Bugsters were born 16 years ago from the body samples of their very first victim and future Kamen Rider, Emu Hojo. Their birth from Emu's samples was the result of unrecorded experiments on Emu's body by Next Genome, Kuroto's contractor in 2010, right before the first Zero Day happened in 2011. This experiment was meant to breed stronger Bugsters as Emu had developed an antibody from the initial surgery.

After Graphite tried to cause a second Zero Day with Proto Drago Knight Hunter Z, the Bugsters evolved further. Some are able to enter their monster form immediately, without having to become a Bugster Union first, and retain memories of past battles against the Riders. They also increased their level to match the Riders' newer forms. In Level 30, The Bugsters can transform into their Bugster form while also taking over the host's body, killing the host's mind from the inside.

According to Parad, since the Bugsters are born from corresponding games, they tend to act like an A.I. which follows video gaming rules. Some take on an antagonist role from the game and fight their hosts while others behave as support characters and aid their hosts and the Kamen Riders. Though Bugsters may be in opposition, they follow the rules and never treat each other unfairly, unlike the way Kuroto treated his team member Motors.

When Kuroto becomes a fugitive, the Bugsters reorganize under their new commander, Genm Corp's new CEO, Ren Amagasaki. With the Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashat completed, many Bugsters obtain their full manifestation without infecting the hosts, including Graphite's revival, with Ren brainwashing Poppy. Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashats are mass-produced and flood the market to destroy humanity with a pandemic, until Masamune returns to Genm Corp. and launches his own plans.

Parad

is one of the leaders of the Bugsters who takes the appearance of a teenager/young adult with pixel-themed pants. Lacking his own game correspondence, he is a manifestation of Emu's desire from his childhood to have a playmate. Although protective of his race and hateful of humanity's pride, the true purpose of his existence is to enjoy fighting Emu.

Parad was the first Bugster to exist during Emu's infection and has since dominated as his gamer persona "M". His time within Emu's body helped the former to enjoy a long popularity as a gamer. After beating a young Nico in the 2010 _Tekken_ tournament, the vigorous effort took a huge toll and he collapsed. During that time, scientists from Next Genome under Kuroto's request took advantage by harvesting the virus and separating Parad from Emu. Parad's departure allowed Emu to regain his ambition to become a doctor while retaining his gamer persona. In the present day, Parad joins forces with Kuroto to help him with Kamen Rider Chronicle's completion but would help his former host on certain occasions before completely deserting Kuroto for abusing Motors Bugster. After killing Kuroto and taking over the Kamen Rider Chronicle project, Parad completes it with help from Graphite and a brainwashed Poppy, planning to eliminate humanity for the Bugsters. Seeing how Emu prioritized saving Poppy, Parad possessed his host again and obtained his DNA sample, forcing the young intern to fight into the point of exhaustion before Genm's intervention.

As a villain character in the Kamen Rider Chronicle game, Parad becomes afraid of being "permanently killed" as he attempts to face Masamune to avenge Lovrica. He confronts Emu instead, who needs to erase his Bugster counterpart to obtain the Perfect Knock Out Gashatrophy in the hopes to saving Nico. Parad ends up being "destroyed", metaphysically drowning while Emu loses his ability to transform. He was actually reabsorbed by Emu and was then released from his host using the Mighty Brothers XX Gashat, finally realizing the fear of death and becoming remorseful about his actions. Parad and Emu then resolve to end Kamen Rider Chronicle together. After Kamen Rider Chronicle is complete and Masamune fuses with the final boss to become Gamedeus Cronus, Poppy sacrifices herself to fuse with the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat to cure Gamedeus Cronus' Bugster-zombified victims and separate Gamedeus from Masamune. Parad then sacrifices himself by exposing himself and Gamedeus to the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat's antivirus, with his final words being for Emu to keep moving forward and fight as a regular human. But a fragment of Parad's data entered Emu's body, and Emu is able to reconstitute Parad.

By his own, Parad demonstrated the ability to both teleport and block Lazer's Giri Giri Critical Finish without suffering any damage, while still in his human form. As he is Emu's Bugster, he is capable of existing as Genius Gamer M even after the Next Genome's operation split them. It was also through this link that he obtained Emu's DNA imprint in order to utilize Kuroto's Gamer Driver after goading the young intern to use Maximum Mighty X's reprogramming power.

After the crisis in _Heisei Generation_, Parad disguises himself as a second Dr. Pac-Man in _Kamen Rider Genm_ to support Kuroto in creating the Gambarizing Gashat and those themed after Bandai Namco games.

Using data from Emu's Mighty Brothers XX Gashat, Kuroto manages to complete Parad's personal Gashat, the , for him to transform into without a Gamer Driver. According to Kuroto, Para-DX is a boss character for Kamen Rider Chronicle so he created the Gashat Gear Dual for Parad to utilize while the game was under development. The Gashat Gear Dual is composed of two Gashats for Para-DX to assume one of two Level 50 forms depending on which logo position he rotates its dial to before pressing its corresponding Gashat's button. He then inserts the Gashat Gear Dual into the strap-like on the right waist of his gold-colored . When activating either Gashat, a Game Area is created which generates several Energy Items with unique power-ups. Each of Para-DX's forms have a finisher that is activated by rotating the Gashat Gear Dual's dial to its neutral position, then rotating it back to its previous logo position, and finally inserting the Gashat Gear Dual back into the Gear Holder.

-   : A puzzle game-based Gashat that allows Para-DX to assume his blue-colored primary form, , where he is capable of manipulating any number of Energy Items within the Game Area by mixing their individual power-ups to enhance his attacks. He can also generate puzzle piece-like energy shields. Para-DX's finisher in this form is a Rider Kick known as the .

-   : A fighting game-based Gashat that allows Para-DX to assume his red-colored secondary form, , where he is equipped with his Puzzle Gamer form's shoulder pads as the gauntlet-like for enhanced punching. He can also generate fire via pyrokinesis. Para-DX's finisher in this form is a Rider Punch known as the .

As Parad is partially Genius Gamer M, he dominated the Double Action Gamer Level XX R half and took full control of it while possessing Ex-Aid, forcing both Level XX halves to fight each other. Once he and Emu become allies, Parad can assume control of Double Action Gamer Level XX R to instead fight alongside Ex-Aid when the latter splits himself into his Level XX form.

Parad later claims Kuroto's Gamer Driver as his own so he can use it in conjunction with the Gashat Gear Dual, which combines Perfect Puzzle and Knock Out Fighter into , to transform into a fusion of his Level 50 forms known as by inserting the Gashat Gear Dual while it is set to its neutral position into the Gamer Driver and then pulling its lever. Para-DX's Gashacon weapon in this form is the , which has two modes: Axe and Gun. Like the Gashacon Key Slasher, the Gashacon Parabragun can hold either two Gashats or one dual-based Gashat for Para-DX to perform its Critical Finish. Inserting Mighty Brothers XX into the Gashacon Parabragun allows Para-DX to temporarily split into his two Level 50 forms. By closing and pulling the Gamer Driver's lever a second time, he can perform one of three finishers depending on the Gashat Gear Dual's current position. In addition to both of the Gear Holder-based finishers, each activated by rotating between the Gashat Gear Dual's logo positions (Critical Combo via Perfect Puzzle and Critical Smash via Knock Out Fighter), this form has its own personal finisher known as the that is activated when the Gashat Gear Dual is in its neutral position.

Parad is portrayed by .

Graphite

is a Draconic Warrior Bugster and one of the leaders of the Bugsters. He was born from the data of Drago Knight Hunter Z when its virus essence infected Saki Momose, gaining his own human form after completing his manifestation. Due to his part in Saki's death, he becomes a nemesis to both Hiiro and Taiga. Graphite resurfaces to monitor the infection of Bugster Viruses and face the Kamen Riders. After his Gashacon Bugvisor is revoked by Kuroto for his hasty decision to fight Brave, he stole Proto Drago Knight Hunter Z in Kuroto's place and spread the infection before he was killed by all four doctor Riders. He is resurrected by Parad a year later and upgraded to Level 99 in order to participate in Kamen Rider Chronicle. Seeing Cronus as a threat to their campaign, Graphite obtained a sample of Gamedeus and used his body to cultivate the virus. As the final high tier of Kamen Rider Chronicle, Graphite settles his score with Brave and Snipe while violently refusing Cronus' assistance. Graphite could only be defeated by Ride-Player Nico, who had earned the right as the only Ride-Player to successfully defeat all Bugsters in the game. Before his demise, Graphite thanks his allies and enemies alike for allowing him to fulfill his role as a game character.

As a Bugster form, Graphite is known by the name and wields a fang-like double-bladed pole weapon called the . His forms includes:

-   His original form is a green colored Bugster transformed through the use of a Gashacon Bugvisor, which he also utilized as an infection device. He wore a Bugster Buckle on his waist but is never shown using it. His finisher is the .
-   After Kuroto revoked his Gashacon Bugvisor, Graphite steals the beta-test and transforms into the black-colored . This form increased his powers and allowed him to perform either the or the Do-Do-Do-Do Dark Dragon Sword.
-   After his resurrection, Graphite evolves into Level 99 and transforms into the crimson-colored , rivaling both Maximum Gamer and Perfect Knock Out Gamer. He wields the . Aside from pyrokinetic-based attacks, he can perform the . Through cultivation of Gamedeus' virus, Graphite can free himself from Cronus' Pause ability.

Graphite is portrayed by .

Ren Amagasaki/Lovrica

first appears as the new CEO of Genm Corp., taking over when Kuroto Dan becomes a fugitive for his part in Zero Day. Ren is actually a Bugster known as the , a fully manifested Bugster born from the data of Toki Meki Crisis who can assume human form. While able to travel the physical and digital worlds, Ren also possesses the ability to alter a Bugsters' mind (as when making Poppy do his bidding) and breathe fire while in his human form. However, Ren is not truly sadistic and violent, though he is a manipulative ladies man. He is killed permanently by Kamen Rider Cronus, who used his Pause ability to negate Ren's traits and immortality resurrection.

In _Another Ending_, during CR's project on reviving the sealed Bugster virus victims, Lovrica is also revived. He infects an American gamer named , who has a crush on Nico Saiba, and manipulates a revived Saki Momose, causing yet another conflict between Snipe and Brave.

Originating from a dating-simulation game, Lovrica cannot be harmed by conventional attacks. However, he is vulnerable when he is heartbroken, such as when he is insulted or rejected by the females he flirts with, or when the Bugster Virus groupies accompanying him are deleted by Ex-Aid.

Ren Amagasaki is portrayed by . The Lovrica Bugster's voice is portrayed by , the series' narrator. In his initial cameo, he was portrayed by an unidentified stand-in.

Gamedeus

, or the , is the final boss of Kamen Rider Chronicle who would only appear once all the are collected. Gamedeus has the ability to use other Bugsters' powers and is armed with both the sword-like and the shield-like . Kuroto calls him the ultimate Bugster whose power surpasses all the other Gashat games and that only Cronus can stop him. Parad and Graphite manage to extract a sample of Gamedeus' data from his Bugster Union body; Graphite injects the sample into his body to gain immunity to Cronus' Pause ability.

When Gamedeus appears in his fully manifested form, Masamune's programming causes the Bugster to do his bidding, such as creating a full-scale Game Disease outbreak that spreads across Japan. Kiriya has Kuroto create the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat to cure all of the infected patients and weaken Gamedeus. Before Ex-Aid and Para-DX can finish Gamedeus, Cronus destroys Gamedeus' physical form and absorbs the virus data to assume the form of Gamedeus Cronus. After released from Masamune's body and reconstituted, Gamedeus is destroyed by Parad who exposes them both to the Doctor Mighty XX Gashat's antivirus.

In _True Ending_, Machina Visions CEO, Johnny Maxima, appears to have obtained Gamedeus' virus in the original Gashacon Bugvisor he obtained after Graphite's defeat during Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, transforming him into his own version of Gamedeus.

Gamedeus is voiced by .

Bugster combatants

These Bugsters were born from the boss characters of their respective game series. The previously destroyed combatants were revived sometime after Graphite caused the second Zero Day and gained the ability to progress to higher levels. Excluding Burgermon and the Collabos, the defeated Bugsters' essences were collected by Kuroto's Gashacon Bugvisor in hopes of turning them into boss characters in _Kamen Rider Chronicle_. After Parad steals the Gashacon Bugvisor from Kuroto, he uses it to revive them, Graphite and Asuna Karino (Poppy's human form).

-   The is born from the data of Mighty Action X, based on the boss character Baron Salty, armed with the gauntlet-like . The Salty Bugster invaded Emu's 8-year-old patient before manifesting. Salty's infection on Sōta makes the boy addicted to games like Mighty Action X. His first-level body is destroyed by Ex-Aid. He later returns as a Level 3, manifesting into his monster form immediately from Emu's 8-year-old patient . After his Level 3 physical body is destroyed by Ex-Aid, Brave and Poppy, Salty is imprisoned within the Gashacon Bugvisor by Parad. During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, his physical body in Level 10 is destroyed by Brave Hunter Quest Gamer Level 5 (Full Dragon) before Ride-Player Nico finally destroys him. He is later killed permanently by Masamune using his Master Gashat's data to delete him. After being summoned by Gamedeus Cronus, his physical body is destroyed by Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50. Voiced by .
-   The is born from the data of Taddle Quest, based on the evil magician Alhambra, armed with the . The Alhambra Bugster infected 27-year-old before manifesting and attempted to take Rensuke's 27-year-old fiancé, , as his bride. His virus first developed when Asami cancels her marriage with Rensuke. His first-level body is destroyed by Ex-Aid and Brave. He later returns as a Level 5, manifesting into his monster form immediately from a 48-year-old surgeon named who is dying from cancer, and tries to eliminate Brave in hopes of stressing Shirakawa to gain his physical body. Having a higher level than Brave and Snipe, he manages to easily manhandle them both. After his physical body is destroyed again, this time by Ex-Aid Double Action Gamer Level XX, Alhambra is imprisoned within the Gashacon Bugvisor by Genm. During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, his physical body is destroyed by Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50 before Ride-Player Nico finally destroys him. He later returns and is destroyed by Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99. After being summoned by Gamedeus Cronus, his physical body is destroyed by Brave Legacy Gamer Level 100. Voiced by .
-   The is born from the data of Bang Bang Shooting, based on the commander Revol, armed with the machine gun-like in his right arm. The Revol Bugster infected 8-year-old before manifesting and targeting doctors around Yūki, which happened to be the Riders themselves. He manifested from Yūki's fear of doctors but Ex-Aid risked himself under attack to encourage Yūki to overcome his fear. Though all of Revol's clones are destroyed by Ex-Aid, Revol was hiding in his camouflage mode but is spotted and destroyed by Snipe. After Nico steals Taiga's equipment to fight Ex-Aid, unaware that ordinary humans can't use it, she is immediately infected by the Gamer Driver's side effects, thus giving Revol a new Level 5 physical body. However, before having to battle the Riders for the second time, Parad prevents it from interfering. Revol started to defend Ex-Aid from both the Riders and Bugsters alike in the hopes of obtaining a physical form, realizing that Emu was the source of Nico's stress. However, Para-DX attacks Revol and destroyed his physical body which was captured in the Gashacon Bugvisor by Genm. During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, his physical body is destroyed by Ride-Player Nico. After being summoned by Gamedeus Cronus, his physical body is destroyed by Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50. Voiced by .
-   The is born from the data of Bakusou Bike, based on the rival racer Motors where he rides on a motorcycle called the . The Motors Bugster invaded Kiriya's 27-year-old colleague , whom Graphite infected and stressed by kidnapping Yoshitaka's 21-year-old sister . He is defeated by Lazer with help from Ex-Aid, but his body was not destroyed immediately. When Lazer attempted to collect Motors as a sample for his investigation into the Bugsters, his first-level body is destroyed by Genm. Tsukuru is later infected by Kuroto, causing Motors to manifest in Level 5 and attack the Genm Corp. employees supporting Tsukuru; this also lures Ex-Aid who succumbs to his own Game Disease. His purpose fulfilled, Motors is then destroyed by Genm which causes Parad to break their alliance. The Motors Bugster invaded , a rock band vocalist and guitarist, before manifesting in Level 20. His physical form was removed from this host and destroyed by Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99. During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, Motors' physical body is destroyed by Brave Fantasy Gamer Level 50. Voiced by .
-   The are a series of Bugsters born from Level 3 Armor type games and house the Level 3-type Rider Gashat on the right side of their heads, which gave them the Gashat's armor and arsenals.
    -   The first Collabos Bugster is born from the data of Gekitotsu Robots. At first, it was unknown whether it manifested from infected victims or the Gashat itself, until it is revealed that Graphite had infected 19-year-old music-college student and DoReMiFa Beat. This Collabos Bugster can use the gauntlet-like on its right hand as a rocket fist. During the Riders' fight against Genm and Collabos, Ex-Aid destroys this Collabos and retrieves the Gekitotsu Robots Gashat to transform into his Robot Action Gamer Level 3, allowing him to overpower Genm's Sports Action Gamer Level 3.
    -   The second Collabos Bugster is born from the data of DoReMiFa Beat, which also infected Yōko Horiuchi. This Collabos Bugster can use a speaker on its left shoulder called the to project music notes on his enemies which explode if they fail to perfectly dance to the notes. During Brave's vengeful fight, accompanied by Ex-Aid against Graphite and Collabos, he destroys this Collabos and retrieves the DoReMiFa Beat Gashat to transform into his Beat Quest Gamer Level 3, allowing him to overpower Graphite.
    -   The third Collabos Bugster is born from the data of Giri Giri Chambara, which infected a 50-year-old restricted elderly parent, . This Collabos Bugster can use a katana called the and perform expert sword techniques. Ex-Aid and Lazer destroy this Collabos and retrieve the Giri Giri Chambara Gashat for Lazer to transform into his Chambara Bike Gamer Level 3.
    -   The fourth Collabos Bugster is born from the data of Jet Combat, which infects Yoshio Okada. This Collabos Bugster can use a gatling jet pack called the . It was later defeated by Snipe who retrieved the Jet Combat Gashat to transform into Combat Shooting Gamer Level 3. The now-armorless Collabos is used by Taiga as bait to lure both Ex-Aid and Brave. During the fight, he was released by Snipe to distract Ex-Aid before being destroyed by Snipe's Jet Critical Strike.
    -   The fifth Collabos Bugster is born from an unknown data. It can use the Proto Gekitotsu Robots to transform into Robol Bugster and the Proto Giri Giri Chambara to transform into Giril Bugster. Once Genm absorbs the data of all seven previous titular Heisei Kamen Riders in order to complete the Ganbarizing Gashat, he uses the armorless Collabos to summon three digitized versions of Double, OOO and Fourze.
-   The is born from the data of Ju Ju Burger and infects the game's creator, Tsukuru Koboshi. Unlike other Bugsters, but much like Poppy, this Bugster is harmless and friendly with his host as Tsukuru is happy to see his creation alive. In order to keep the Bugster in check Tsukuru must feed Burgermon large quantities of burgers. Tsukuru later creates a Ju Ju Burger Gashat for Ex-Aid to transform into Burger Action Gamer Level 4 and create a delicious burger for Burgermon's satisfaction, causing the Game Disease in Tsukuru to subside. Burgermon is permanently killed by Genm, sacrificing himself protecting his creator. When Tsukuru becomes CEO of Gemn Corp., he makes Burgermon a secondary mascot of the company. Voiced by .
-   The is born from the data of Gekitotsu Robots, based on boss character Gatton, armed with a gauntlet called the . The Gatton Bugster infected a 25-year-old _buyō_ dancer named before manifesting in Level 30. His physical form is removed from this host and destroyed by Brave Fantasy Gamer Level 50. During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, his physical body is destroyed by Ride-Player Nico. He later returns before his physical body is destroyed by Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99. Voiced by .
-   The is born from the data of Jet Combat where he is armed with a jet pack called the . The Vernier Bugster infects a 17-year-old acrophobic high school student named who is stressed over an amusement park date, and manifests in Level 30. His physical form is removed from his host and destroyed by Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50. The Gatton Bugster infected , the synthesizer player of the rock band Neironzu, before manifesting in Level 40. His physical form is removed from his host and destroyed by Brave Hunter Quest Gamer Level 5 (Full Dragon). During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, his physical body is destroyed by Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50 before Ride-Player Nico finally destroys him. Voiced by .
-   The is born from the data of Giri Giri Chambara, armed with a pair of katanas called the . The Kaiden Bugster infected a 50-year-old stubborn detective named , who lost his son in the first Zero Day and believed Masamune Dan to be the culprit, before manifesting in Level 30. His physical form is removed from his host and destroyed by Brave Hunter Quest Gamer Level 5 (Full Dragon). The Kaiden Bugster invaded , the taiko player of the rock band Neironzu, before manifesting in Level 40. His physical form is removed from his host and destroyed by Snipe Simulation Gamer Level 50. During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, his physical body is destroyed by Ride-Player Nico. He later returns as a Level 60 before his physical body is destroyed by Ex-Aid Muteki Gamer. After being summoned by Gamedeus Cronus, his physical body is destroyed by Brave Legacy Gamer Level 100. Voiced by .
-   The is born from the data of Shakariki Sports where he rides a bicycle called the . When Ministry of Health officers found Kuroto Dan's hideout and attempt to arrest him, Kuroto infects himself to get away and trick the Riders, manifesting Charlie Bugster in Level 30. His physical form is removed from his host and destroyed by Ex-Aid Double Action Gamer Level XX. During the Kamen Rider Chronicle crisis, his physical body is destroyed by Ride-Player Nico. Voiced by .

Hatena

The is born from the data of the Hate Sate Puzzle game, armed with the . The Hatena Bugster infected Tōgo Kiyomiya before manifesting. He is destroyed by Kamen Rider Ghost Tenkatouitsu Damashii.

In _Kamen Rider Para-DX_, this Bugster is created as a boss for Kuroto's mysterious adventure game titled . He is destroyed by Ex-Aid and Para-DX Double Fighter Gamer Level 39.

The Hatena Bugster is voiced by in _Heisei Generations_ and by in _Kamen Rider Para-DX_.

Nebula Bugsters

The are hybrids between regular Bugsters and Smashes created by both iterations of Kaisei Mogami from the samples of Bugster viruses and Nebula Gas liquids.

Another Parad

, better known as is a Parad that Kuroto created using his resurrected father Masamune as a host incubator, having Zaizen's daughter Saiko reprogram Black to support Kuroto's cause by replacing Parad to prevent the CR from reviving the sealed Bugster virus victims while acquiring human DNA for Kuroto's deception.

Utilizing a black version of Gashat Gear Dual known as and a Gamer Driver, he can transform into . His default form is a black version of Perfect Knock Out Gamer Level 99 known as by inserting the Gashat Gear Dual while it is set to its neutral position into the Gamer Driver and then pulling its lever.

Like the original Parad, Another Parad is portrayed by Shouma Kai.


Ride-Players

The are civilians infected with the Bugster Virus who gain the powers of the Kamen Rider Chronicle Gashats to transform into this Rider form, with a silver-colored version of the Para-DX Buckle known as the . New players are guided by Poppy with their standard armaments being a dagger called the which doubles as a gun, and can also take Gashats from defeated doctor Riders to utilize their Gashacon weapons. Defeated Ride-Players vanish as part of the Bugsters' plan to eliminate humanity, Parad proclaiming that his race are the true players. If the Ride-Players quit the game without defeating a single Bugster, they will die from Game Disease. The Ministry of Health and survivors warn the public, but Parad and Ren Amagasaki fool the players by announcing that everyone will be revived if someone wins the game. However, Masamune stole the Proto Gashats holding the victims' souls to use as hostages. The only way to retrieve their data is with Masamune's Kamen Rider Chronicle Master Gashat, but Masamune kills himself and took the device with him, leaving CR to search for another method of rescuing the victims.


Next Genome Institute

The is a transhumanist institute which conducted groundbreaking and innovative research on genomes called the , though their methods are considered unethical with rumors of horrific experiments. Six years prior to the series, the group was approached by Kuroto Dan to extract the Bugster Virus from Emu's body; this resulted in the creation of Parad while the scientists were infected and sent to the game world to be reborn as Bugsters. The group resurface in _Kamen Rider Heisei Generations: Dr. Pac-Man vs. Ex-Aid & Ghost with Legend Rider_, stealing the Proto-Gashats from a compliant Kuroto for their objective to create the ultimate life form who is immune to all disease.

Michihiko Zaizen

is a 60-year-old authority on gene therapy and director of the Next Genome Institute who went missing for six years, revealed to have been infected with the Bugster Virus and reborn as a Bugster. Assuming the identity of , Zaizen uses the Gashacon Bugvisor stolen from Genm Corp. to spread across the city to identify carriers of a new strain of the Bugster Virus. Once he captured Tōgo Kiyomiya, he spliced the youth's Bugster strain with his digitized DNA to transform into the ultimate lifeform, . Zaizen then attempted to turn Tōgo into another Genomes, intending to repeat the process to turn all humans into disease-resistant beings, when the Kamen Riders intervene. He is destroyed by Kamen Rider Ex-Aid Double Action Gamer Level XX.

In _Kamen Rider Genm_, Parad assumed the form of Dr. Pac-Man and assisted the three doctor Riders against Genm and his copied versions of the Heisei Riders, as a means to gather the battle data of the three classic Bandai Namco game Gashats which the three doctor Riders are using.

In _Another Ending_, it is revealrd that Zaizen had a daughter named Saiko Yaotome whose attempt to avenge her father's death was exploited by Kuroto in his last deception.

Michihiko Zaizen is portrayed by .

Sōji Kuruse

is a former doctor and member of the Next Genome Institute who went missing for six years, but recently resurfaced and works alongside his boss Michihiko Zaizen. He uses the beta-test Gashat stolen from Genm Corp. to transform into the and is defeated by Kamen Rider Drive Type Tridoron.

Sōji Kuruse is portrayed by professional wrestler .

Kazushige Ryūzaki

is a former doctor and member of the Next Genome Institute who went missing for six years, but recently resurfaced and works alongside his boss Michihiko Zaizen. He uses the Proto Drago Knight Hunter Z Gashat stolen from Genm Corp. to transform into the . He is defeated by Kamen Rider Wizard Infinity Style.

Kazushige Ryūzaki is portrayed by .

Ageha Takeda

is a former doctor and member of the Next Genome Institute who has been missing for six years, but recently resurfaced and works alongside her boss Michihiko Zaizen. She wields a Chinese sword and utilizes a Chinese Martial Arts. She uses the beta-test Gashat stolen from Genm Corp. to transform into the and is defeated by Kamen Rider Gaim Kiwami Arms.

Ageha Takeda is portrayed by .


Tōgo Kiyomiya

is an 18-year-old high-school computer-programming prodigy who developed the puzzle game . He is captured by Michihiko Zaizen because he is a carrier of a new type of Bugster Virus, but is rescued once Kamen Riders Ex-Aid, Ghost, Drive, Gaim and Wizard defeat the Next Genome Institute.

Tōgo Kiyomiya is portrayed by .


Foundation X researcher

An unidentified Foundation X researcher who appeared in _Kamen Rider Brave: Survive! The Revived Beast Rider Squad_. He visited Seito University Hospital and secretly provided the Night of Safari Gashat to Emu Hojo in order to see how he would use its power. However, the Gashat is found by Hiiro Kagami, who used its power to defeat Takeshi Asakura/Kamen Rider Ouja from _Kamen Rider Ryuki_ and his Beast Rider Squad. The agent recovered this Gashat and reported to his superiors that the "experiment" was a success and that they can begin their research on the Gashats.

The researcher of Foundation X is portrayed by suit actor .


Another Hiiro

is Hiiro Kagami from the world of the Ultra Super Hero Taisen game who appears in _Kamen Rider × Super Sentai: Ultra Super Hero Taisen_. He is dressed in black and can come and go between the Game World and the real world. After being defeated by Brave, Another Hiiro gives him the Galaxian Gashat, an Energy Item (Giant) and Ultra Super Hero Cards. When Game World's Shocker is defeated, Another Hiiro and Game World's Utsutsemimaru help other Game World counterparts of Kamen Rider and Super Sentai heroes restore the Ultra Super Hero Taisen Game World.

Using the Japanese role-playing game-based Gashat allows Another Hiiro to become . His primary form is where his weapon is the flame-bladed sword-like . This Gashat would later be used by the original Hiiro Kagami to access Legacy Gamer Level 100.

Like the original Hiiro Kagami, Another Hiiro is also portrayed by Toshiki Seto.


Eito Kirino

is a 10-year-old closed-minded boy who has the ability to come and go between the real world and the Game World. He created the Ultra Super Hero Taisen game and released it onto the Internet in order to destroy the boring real world before entering the game's world. He is watched over by his doctor, Hiiro.

Eito Kirino is portrayed by .


Great Leader Shocker III

is the new leader of Shocker who is one of the villains in _Kamen Rider × Super Sentai: Ultra Super Hero Taisen_. His true form is the . In battle, he wields twin swords. He was once defeated by Kamen Rider but survived in the Game World. After Team Ex-Aid transform into the Goriders to destroy the Andor Genesis spaceship, he appears as the boss of the bonus stage of the Ultra Super Hero Taisen game. During the final battle, he is killed when his red-colored Big Morimers Robo is destroyed by an enlarged Ex-Aid Maximum Gamer Level 99 along with the aid of the Kyurangers' two Kyurenoh robots (01-03-05-07-09 and 01-02-04-06-08) via the Futago Kyutama and Orion spaceship.

Great Leader Shocker III is portrayed by the singer .


Goriders

is a Kamen Rider/Super Sentai hybrid team that also appears in the team's titular web mini-series sequel of _Kamen Rider × Super Sentai: Ultra Super Hero Taisen_. Composed of the red-colored , the blue-colored , the yellow-colored , the pink-colored and the green-colored , this team incorporates traits from the first Sentai, _Himitsu Sentai Gorenger_, and Kamen Riders 1 and 2 from the original _Kamen Rider_ series. Their transformation gadget is accessed via the Gorider cards. The Goriders use a finned, multicolored grenade the size and shape of an American-style football called the , also called , as a finishing weapon, produced by Momorider and passed among the other Riders until Akarider launches it on the enemy with a Rider Kick.

The Goriders in _Ultra Super Hero Taisen_ are Kamen Rider Ex-Aid (Akarider), Ao Ninger (Aorider), Beet Buster (Kirider), Kamen Rider Den-O Sword Form (Momorider) and Kamen Rider Zolda (Midorider) of Team Ex-Aid, who earn the Gorider cards upon winning the Ultra Super Hero Taisen tournament. In _Kamen Sentai Gorider_, while facing Kamen Rider Genm and Totema to escape the Game World created by them, Ex-Aid uses the Gorider cards to briefly transform Kamen Rider Baron in Akarider, Kamen Rider Blade in Aorider, Kamen Rider Lazer in Kirider, Kamen Rider Marika in Momorider and Another Agito in Midorider.


Totema

is a mysterious monster who appears in _Kamen Sentai Gorider_. He is one of Kuroto's creations, made as an impossible final boss for Kuroto's unbeatable game. Totema can reconstruct his body even if he is blown to pieces. He is finally destroyed by Ex-Aid and the five Goriders.

Totema is voiced by and portrayed by Ruka Matsuda, Poppy Pipopapo's actress when disguising as a maid NPC.


Machina Vision

is a foreign video game company with the latest VR technology that cooperated with Genm Corp. in the distribution of Kamen Rider Chronicle in exchange for a Gamer Driver from Masamune Dan. The deal failed as neither party could fulfill the agreement (augmenting Kamen Rider Chronicle with virtual reality project). A year after Masamune's death, Machina Vision hacked Genm Corp.'s servers to steal the data of the Gamer Driver and the Rider Gashats. Its employees feature in _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid the Movie: True Ending_.

Kagenari Nagumo

is an executive of Machina Vision. His goal is to integrate humanity with the virtual reality world to create an "eternal heaven", a world without despair, for his daughter Madoka. To achieve his goal, he infects people with a new type of virus to trap their consciousness in the virtual reality world, and seeks to destroy the real world. He is revealed to be Madoka's biological father and Akemi Hoshi's ex-husband, until he left them after his illegitimate daughter's birth.

He uses a Gamer Driver and the stealth game-based Gashat, created based on Kamen Rider Chronicle, to transform into . His primary form is , where his weapon is a pair of short ninjatō called the . He uses energy shurikens and the Gashacon Bugvisor to infect people with the virus.

Kagenari Nagumo is portrayed by of Chemistry.

Ninja-Players

The are the henchmen of Kamen Rider Fuma who are composed of the new type of virus. Like the Ride-Players, Ninja-Players share a short ninjatō called the . Like Fuma, they can use virus-containing energy shurikens.

Johnny Maxima

is the mysterious CEO of Machina Vision who aligned himself with Masamune Dan as the Kamen Rider Chronicle incident comes to a head. He steals Graphite's Gashacon Bugvisor while witnessing Gamedeus appear. In the movie _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid the Movie: True Ending_, siding with Kagenari Nagumo, Maxima infects himself with the Gamedeus virus and absorbs three special Gashatrophies (created when Madoka's three wishes are achieved in the virtual reality world) to transform into , a red-colored version of Gamedeus armed with both the sword-like and the shield-like . Gamedeus Machina possesses the same abilities as Gamedeus, but with their power amplified beyond the original. Like the original Gamedeus, he can also transform into the gigantic that has the extendable arms and the sword-like leg. He is defeated by Ex-Aid Muteki Gamer.

Johnny Maxima is portrayed by .


Hoshi family

The Hoshi family are the supporting characters in _Kamen Rider Ex-Aid the Movie: True Ending_. There are only two known family members: the mother, Akemi, and her daughter, Madoka. Kamen Rider Fuma/Kagenori Nagumo was revealed to have been married to Akemi, who gave birth to Madoka in the same time Nagumo left the family. Madoka is a target of Machina Vision, Nagumo's former employer.

Madoka Hoshi

is a 7-year-old girl who needs daily treatments for her childhood brain tumor and transferred to the care of Seito University Hospital. She is the primary target of Kamen Rider Fuma, who happens to be her biological father, Kagenori Nagumo. He plans to save her by transferring her consciousness into virtual reality, making her a Gamedeus virus-infected "player" in his "game" in cyberspace. Ex-Aid attempts to save her from the virtual reality world, but she chooses to stay there for her father.

Madoka Hoshi is portrayed by .

Akemi Hoshi

is Madoka's mother and Nagumo's ex-wife. She raised Madoka on her own.

Akemi Hoshi is portrayed by .


Notes


References


External links

-   Cast on TV Asahi

Ex-Aid *, Kamen Rider Ex-Aid *, Kamen Rider Ex-Aid

[1]