Pedar.jpg RABY MOSHFEGH HAMADANI () (1912-2009), was a Jewish Iranian journalist and writer.


Early life and education

Hamadani was born in Hamadan, Iran, in April 1912. His father Davood Kohan, son of Yitzak, was a merchant in this ancient city. Raby’s grandfather Yitzak travelled to Jerusalem three times on foot to visit the sacred city, receiving the title of Haji Yitzak.

Hamadani attended the Alliance Israelite School in Hamadan, where he became fluent in French. During his childhood and teen-age years, as reported in his published memoirs [1] he experienced the bitter taste of antisemitism . But the overthrow of the corrupt Qajar dynasty by Reza Shah in 1925 had infused a new wave of education, progress and modernization throughout the country.[2] Growing up in this atmosphere of hope, Hamadani became convinced that following the path of democracy and political freedom was the only means to achieve prosperity and that Iran needed the energetic infusion of a talented and well educated younger generation to reestablish her place among the great nations of the Middle East. In 1931, at the age of 17, Hamadani graduated from high school and decided to play a role in this new wave of modernization and freedom. He left his family and traveled to Tehran to continue his studies. He enrolled in the Department of Philosophy and Educational Sciences of the University of Tehran, where he graduated in 1939 while teaching French as a second language at the prestigious Dar-ol-Fonun دارالفنون high school of Tehran.


Career

Hamadani took the first of many steps on the path of journalism and authorship, translating Schopenhauer’s work “The Philosophy of Love” into Persian. His literary work continued in parallel with his employment first as a teacher of French language and literature and later as an employee of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where he was first appointed as French translator and shortly promoted to Director of the Pars News Agency, overseeing the translation of international news for the Iranian press. He continued contributing to Persian literature by translating world-famous masterpieces by Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Flaubert, Schopenhauer, Lockhart and John Dewey, among others, exposing Iranian readers to such western literature works of art as well as modern concepts in education and psychology. He was a prolific writer, authoring several works of fiction that first appeared in weekly instalments in renowned magazines of that era, such as _Omide Iran_ أميد أايران, _Teherane Mossawar_ تهران مصور and others. These writings were later published as stand-alone books (see Bibliography below) and illustrated the frustrations and tribulations of a young and well educated generation of Iranians confronted by the chaotic socio-political changes caused by the rapid modernization of the Iranian society at the time. His books quickly turned into best sellers and paved the way for his subsequent career as a well-known author, journalist and translator.

During the Second World War, Hamadani was appointed editor in chief of _Keyhan_ كيهإن the highly circulated and most popular daily newspaper distributed nationally throughout Iran. In his editorials, he embraced and supported the political platform of Mohammad Mossadegh and the National Front of Iran. In 1949, after a few years serving in the capacity of _Keyhan_’s editor-in-chief, he founded the weekly magazine _Kavian_ كأؤيإن (a politically oriented publication with a distinctly secular and nationalistic voice) and became one of Mossadegh's ardent supporters in the latter's plan to nationalize Iran's oil industry (see Abadan Crisis). He expanded _Kavian_ 's activities to include a printing press capable of color printing the cover pages of _Kavian_, a novel and unique capability that increased the weekly magazine's popularity and circulation. He also founded a publishing company and bookstore, '' Bongah Matbouati Safialishah'' بنكاه مطبوعاتى صفيعليشاه to publish his own as well as other literary works. In 1951 he was invited by President Harry Truman, together with a group of Iranian intellectuals, businessmen and influential journalists, to visit the United States in conjunction with the "International Leadership" program implemented by Truman's administration. Hamadani accompanied Dr. Mossadegh during his visit to the United Nations where the latter successfully defended Iran's claims against the Anglo Iranian Oil Company (AIOC, later renamed British Petroleum) and presented the Iranian government's position in regards to the oil nationalization platform of the National Front.[3] Although the international court at Hague ruled in favor of Iran, President Eisenhower's administration foreign policy was persuaded, by the British government's claims of Mossadegh's collusion with the Communist party of Iran (Hezb Tudeh حزب توده) and the potential danger of Iran falling into the Soviet sphere of influence, to orchestrate the overthrow of Mossadegh government by a military coup 1953 Iranian coup d'état with the tacit agreement of Mohammad Reza Shah. Hamadani's stance against the monarchy and in support of Mossadegh would cost him dearly: after the CIA-led coup that overthrew Mossadegh,[4] _Kavian_ 's offices and printing presses were looted and burned. Mossadegh, a number of his cabinet members and all other journalists and politicians that supported him were arrested. Some were accused of conspiring with the Communist Party of Iran (Hezb Tudeh حزب توده) to overthrow the constitutional monarchy system and declare a republic. They were tried in military courts and executed. Others, like Hamadani were imprisoned. Mossadegh was tried and exiled to his native city of _Ahmadabad_. Hamadani was eventually banished from Iran. He left his family behind, leaving his printing and publishing businesses to be managed by his brothers. For the next 50 years, he lived in exile in Rome, Italy, and Los Angeles, California, where he continued his literary activities by translating various masterpieces from French, English, and Italian into Persian. After the Islamic Revolution in Iran in 1979 resulting in the immigration of his extended family to the United States, he also left Italy to join them in Los Angeles, and continued to publish numerous articles, books and translations. A documentary film about his life was produced by the Center for Iranian Jewish Oral History and is available from the Library of Congress.[5] Hamadani passed away in Los Angeles on 2 October 2009.


Bibliography and Publications

In addition to the hundreds of articles, short stories and sociopolitical editorials published by Hamadani over the course of his fifty-year career in journalism, his collected writings and translations number well over fifty book titles published in Iran and abroad. His most acclaimed novels include "Eshgh va Eshgh" (عشق و عشق) Love and Love, "Delhoreh haye javani" (دلهره هاى جوانى) Anxieties of Youth, "Tahsil-kardeh ha" (تحصيلكردها) The Educated Ones" and "Khaterate Neem Gharn Rooznameh Neghari (خاطرات نيم قرن روزنامه نكارى) Memoirs of Half a Century in Journalism.

His translations from English, French and Italian include Tolstoy's Anna Karenina ﺁنا كارنينا and his "Selected Letters" نامه هاى تولستوى , Flaubert's Madame Bovary مادام بوارى , Dostoevsky's Poor People (ازردكان), The Idiot (ابله)and The Karamazov Brothers (برادران كارامازوف), as well as numerous scientific works in the fields of history, psychology, sociology and philosophy as partially listed here:

BIOGRAPHIES: Stalin استالين(by Emile Ludewig); Napoleon نابلئون (by Louis Madelaine); Nader Shah نادر شاه (by L. Lockhart).

PSYCHOLOGY: Childhood and Adolescence روانشناسي كودك و بالغ (by J.A. Hadfield); Discovering Ourselves روانشناسي براى همه by E.A. Strecher and K.E. Appel; Between Parent and Child روابط والدين با فرزندان by Haiim Ginott; Love Against Hate اعجاز روانكاوى by Karl and Jeanetta Menninger; Teaching the Slow Learner كودكان ديرﺁموز by W.B. Featherstone; Personal Magnetism مانيتيسم شخصى by Paul C. Jagot; Secrets of Mind Power حافظه در روانشناسي by Harry Lorayne.

SOCIOLOGY: Human Nature and Conduct _' اخلاق و شخصيت_'; School and the Student مدرسه و شاكرد and School and Society مدرسه و اجتماع by John Dewey; Sociology جامعه شناسي by Samuel King; What is Sociology? جامعه شناسي جيست by Alex Inkeles.

'''Philosophy: Schiller's masterworks شاهكارهاي شيللر; Schopenhauer's selected works افكار شوبنهاور


References

Category:1914 births Category:2009 deaths Category:Jewish writers Category:Iranian journalists

[1] Memoirs of Half a Century in Journalism (خاطرات نيم قرن روزنامه نكارى), "Khaterate Neem Gharn Rooznameh Neghari", R. Moshfegh Hamadani, Book World Publishers, Los Angeles, 7/1991 (in Persian)

[2] Fifty Five (بنجإه و بنج), "Panjaho Panj", Ali Dashti , Nima Verlag Publishers, 1/2003 (in Persian)

[3] Famous Contemporary Iranians (نامداران معاصر ايران)" Namdaran-e Moaasser-e Iran", M. Alamooti, Book Press, London, 1999, Vol. 2, pages 272-279 (in Persian)

[4] Esther's Children, A Portrait of Iranian Jews, Houman Sarshar, page 271

[5] Moshfegh Hamedani, Library of Congress, https://lccn.loc.gov/2004448578