_ORIGINS (2011–2016)_ is the seventh studio album written and conducted by French electronic record producer Uppermost. It was released on February 10, 2017 through his independent record label Uppwind. The album is also classed as Uppermost's debut compilation album as it includes released and unreleased titles between the years 2011 and 2016. The album also includes his debut breakthrough "Flashback", as well as non-album singles "Beautiful Light", "Mistakes" and "Reminder".[1]

The lead single form the album, entitled "Hope", was released in August 2016 as the follow up single ending his _Impact_ EP era. It was shortly succeeded by his second single, entitled "Stay in Love", featuring vocals from singer/songwriter Ofelia. The album's next single, entitled "Constellation", was released on 9 December 2016 as the album's first promotional single.


Track listing

NOTES

-   signifies an original producer
-   Track 3 "Beautiful Light" samples Michael Jackson & Paul McCartney - "Say Say Say" / Daft Punk - "Face to Face / Birdy - "People Help the People" / Muse - "Madness"
-   Tracks 7, 12, 15, 17, 20 and 21 were released previously from Uppermost's album, entitled _Revolution_ (2013).
-   Tracks 1, 2, 5, 9, 11, 14, 18, 22 and 23 are newly recorded songs.
-   Tracks 3 and 8 were released previously from Uppermost's album, entitled _Control_ (2012).
-   Tracks 10 and 13 were released previously from Uppermost's album, entitled _Evolution_ (2014).
-   Track 6 was released previously from Uppermost's album, entitled _One_ (2012).
-   Track 16 was released previously from Uppermost's album, entitled _Action_ (2011).


References

Category:2017 albums Category:Albums produced by Thomas Bangalter Category:Albums produced by Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo Category:Albums produced by George Martin

[1]