PAATA CHAKHNASHVILI Social psychologist and Pollster with 30 year experience. Author of the first Exit poll in Georgia and Post Soviet Countries. Exit Poll was held during a parliamentary election in 1999 for the tele company Rustavi 2, by two independent companies – "Dia" (Pollster Paata Chakhnashvili) and "Gorbi" (Pollster Merab Pachulia)1.

In 1993, in the city of Rustavi, Paata Chakhnashvili with Erosi Kitsmarishvili, Jarji Aqimidze, Dato Dvali and Temur Bzhalava, was taking an active part in creation of the channel "Rustavi 2"2. In 1993-194 was the head of "Rustavi 2" social and marketing department and also was an author of informational analytic program. In 1994 was a nominee of the tele festival "Mana". One of the first, who started the publication political ratings of the media in Georgia. Specializes in public relations and the influence of psychological factors on the communication processes, nonverbal communications (body language training)3 and image making.

Since 1990, is engaged in consulting for business, media and public organizations, political parties and political leaders. 2003 -2008 was CEO of the Badri Patarkatsishvili's charity foundation and head of charity project supporting the children with leukaemia)4. On 7 November 2007, during the massacre of tele company "Imedi", he was inside the "Imedi" building, where he became a victim of violence and abuse. In 2008, after the death of Badri Patarkacishvli, he was under a repression [http://geworld.ge/View.php?ArtId=3332&lang=ge&Title=levan+vefxvaZe:+me+da+giorgi+TargamaZe+vano+merabiSvilis+agentebi+ar+varT!]5 Producer and author of idea of the documentary film _Day at Home (One Day Shin)_ 6. Paata Chakhnashvili was born on 30 March 1957, in Tbilisi, Georgia. Parents: Father, Shalva Chakhnashvili, Physiologist Professor; Mother: Gulnara Gugushvili – Biologist, Teather. He finished 55th middle school of Tbilisi. In 1974 was enrolled at Sports Academy in Tbilisi, on the faculty of Sport Journalism. In 1978 got the diploma in Sport Journalism. In 1978 he decided to continue studying and was enrolled at Tbilisi State University on the faculty of Philosophy and Psychology, profession – Social Psychology, which he finished successfully in 1983 and got a diploma in Social Psychology. On the same year he was sent to raise his qualification at the Fridrich Shiller University, course for Behaviorism. 1986 -1990 Paata Chakhnashvili worked at D.Uznadze Psychological Institute (Senior Psychologist), 1990-1995 Republican Centre of Aplaid Psychology (Deputy Director and 1996-2000 General Director). Vice President of the association of Young Psychologists and Georgian Psychologists. Constitutor of Neuro-linguistic Programming Association Georgia (NLPAG) in Georgia 7. He is an editor of first Georgian "Marketing Communication" text-books first book "History of Commercials" by Ilia Feradze 8[http://www.nplg.gov.ge/ec/ka/cart/search.html?cmd=search&qs=200::%E1%83%9B%E1%83%90%E1%83%A0%E1%83%99%E1%83%94%E1%83%A2%E1%83%98%E1%83%9C%E1%83%92%E1%83%A3%E1%83%9A%E1%83%98+%E1%83%99%E1%83%9D%E1%83%9B%E1%83%A3%E1%83%9C%E1%83%98%E1%83%99%E1%83%90%E1%83%AA%E1%83%98%E1%83%94%E1%83%91%E1%83%98=::%E1%83%9E%E1%83%90%E1%83%90%E1%83%A2%E1%83%90+%E1%83%A9%E1%83%90%E1%83%AE%E1%83%9C%E1%83%90%E1%83%A8%E1%83%95%E1%83%98%E1%83%9A%E1%83%98]. Author of the Blog - http://paatachakhnashvili.blogspot.com/ , and also an author of articles written in internet portals: http://funtime.ge/mozaika/post/93274-pr-is-istoriuli-wanamzrvrebi-nawili-i-, http://funtime.ge/mozaika/post/93275-pr-is-istoriuli-wanamzrvrebi-nawili-ii-zveli-egvipte, http://funtime.ge/mozaika/post/93276-pr-is-istoriuli-wanamzrvrebi-nawili-iii-zveli-romi, http://funtime.ge/mozaika/post/93277-pr-is-istoriuli-wanamzrvrebi-nawili-iv-jvarosnuli-omebi.

Education: 1964–1974, Tbilisi N55 High School; 1974–1978,Tbilisi State Academy of Sports Faculty of Journalism; 1976-Actor at Studio Georgia Film 910 1978–1983, Tbilisi State University, Faculty of Philosophy and Psychology (Faculty of Social Psychology); 1983, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany, Faculty for Social and Behavioral Sciences (Courses of Improvement of Qualification).

Since 2011 actively engaged in teaching activities. He is a lecturer in the psychology of communication and public relations at the PR School of Georgian American University 11. A year later, in 2013, he has been teaching history of PR 12. Since 2013 also works as a Body Language trainer, at the Center of Training, Recruiting and Consulting - "BeMark"13. Since 2015, the first time in Georgia begins training in Emotional Intelligence (EQ) at Education agency Cambridge Study 141516.


References

Category:1957 births Category:Living people Category:People from Tbilisi Category:Social psychologists from Georgia (country)