In mathematics, one can define a PRODUCT OF GROUP SUBSETS in a natural way. If _S_ and _T_ are subsets of a group _G_, then their product is the subset of _G_ defined by

_S__T_ = {_s__t_ : _s_ ∈ _S_ and _t_ ∈ _T_}.
The subsets _S_ and _T_ need not be subgroups for this product to be well defined. The associativity of this product follows from that of the group product. The product of group subsets therefore defines a natural monoid structure on the power set of _G_.

A lot more can be said in the case where _S_ and _T_ are subgroups. The product of two subgroups _S_ and _T_ of a group _G_ is itself a subgroup of _G_ if and only if _ST_ = _TS_.


Product of subgroups

If _S_ and _T_ are subgroups of _G_, their product need not be a subgroup (for example, two distinct subgroups of order 2 in the symmetric group on 3 symbols). This product is sometimes called the _Frobenius product_.[1] In general, the product of two subgroups _S_ and _T_ is a subgroup if and only if _ST_ = _TS_,[2] and the two subgroups are said to permute. (Walter Ledermann has called this fact the _Product Theorem_,[3] but this name, just like "Frobenius product" is by no means standard.) In this case, _ST_ is the group generated by _S_ and _T_; i.e., _ST_ = _TS_ = ⟨_S_ ∪ _T_⟩.

If either _S_ or _T_ is normal then the condition _ST_ = _TS_ is satisfied and the product is a subgroup.[4][5] If both _S_ and _T_ are normal, then the product is normal as well.[6]

If _S_ and _T_ are finite subgroups of a group _G_, then _ST_ is a subset of _G_ of size _|ST|_ given by the _product formula_:

$$|ST| = \frac{|S||T|}{|S\cap T|}$$
Note that this applies even if neither _S_ nor _T_ is normal.

Modular law

The following MODULAR LAW (FOR GROUPS) holds for any _Q_ a subgroup of _S_, where _T_ is any other arbitrary subgroup (and both _S_ and _T_ are subgroups of some group _G_):

    _Q_(_S_ ∩ _T_) = _S_ ∩ (_QT_).

The two products that appear in this equality are not necessarily subgroups.

If _QT_ is a subgroup (equivalently, as noted above, if _Q_ and _T_ permute) then _QT_ = ⟨_Q_ ∪ _T_⟩ = _Q_ ∨ _T_; i.e., _QT_ is the join of _Q_ and _T_ in the lattice of subgroups of _G_, and the modular law for such a pair may also be written as _Q_ ∨ (_S_ ∩ _T_) = _S_ ∩ (_Q ∨ T_), which is the equation that defines a modular lattice if it holds for any three elements of the lattice with _Q_ ≤ _S_. In particular, since normal subgroups permute with each other, they form a modular sublattice.

A group in which every subgroup permutes is called an Iwasawa group. The subgroup lattice of an Iwasawa group is thus a modular lattice, so these groups are sometimes called _modular groups_[7] (although this latter term may have other meanings.)

The assumption in the modular law for groups (as formulated above) that _Q_ is a subgroup of _S_ is essential. If _Q_ is _not_ a subgroup of _S_, then the tentative, more general distributive property that one may consider _S_ ∩ (_QT_) = (_S_ ∩ _Q_)(_S_ ∩ _T_) is _false_.[8][9]

Product of subgroups with trivial intersection

In particular, if _S_ and _T_ intersect only in the identity, then every element of _ST_ has a unique expression as a product _st_ with _s_ in _S_ and _t_ in _T_. If _S_ and _T_ also commute, then _ST_ is a group, and is called a Zappa–Szép product. Even further, if _S_ or _T_ is normal in _ST_, then _ST_ coincides with the semidirect product of _S_ and _T_. Finally, if both _S_ and _T_ are normal in _ST_, then _ST_ coincides with the direct product of _S_ and _T_.

If _S_ and _T_ are subgroups whose intersection is the trivial subgroup (identity element) and additionally _ST_ = _G_, then _S_ is called a complement of _T_ and vice versa.

By a (locally unambiguous) abuse of terminology, two subgroups that intersect only on the (otherwise obligatory) identity are sometimes called disjoint.[10]

Product of subgroups with non-trivial intersection

A question that arises in the case of a non-trivial intersection between a normal subgroup _N_ and a subgroup _K_ is what is the structure of the quotient _NK_/_N_. Although one might be tempted to just "cancel out" _N_ and say the answer is _K_, that is not correct because a homomorphism with kernel _N_ will also "collapse" (map to 1) all elements of _K_ that happen to be in _N_. Thus the correct answer is that _NK_/_N_ is isomorphic with _K_/(_N_∩_K_). This fact is sometimes called the second isomorphism theorem,[11] (although the numbering of these theorems sees some variation between authors); it has also been called the _diamond theorem_ by I. Martin Isaacs because of the shape of subgroup lattice involved,[12] and has also been called the _parallelogram rule_ by Paul Moritz Cohn, who thus emphasized analogy with the parallelogram rule for vectors because in the resulting subgroup lattice the two sides assumed to represent the quotient groups (_SN_) / _N_ and _S_ / (_S_ ∩ _N_) are "equal" in the sense of isomorphism.[13]

Frattini's argument guarantees the existence of a product of subgroups (giving rise to the whole group) in a case where the intersection is not necessarily trivial (and for this latter reason the two subgroups are not complements). More specifically, if _G_ is a finite group with normal subgroup _N_, and if _P_ is a Sylow _p_-subgroup of _N_, then _G_ = _N__(_G_)(_P_)_N_, where _N__(_G_)(_P_) denotes the normalizer of _P_ in _G_. (Note that the normalizer of _P_ includes _P_, so the intersection between _N_ and _N__(_G_)(_P_) is at least _P_.)


Generalization to semigroups

In a semigroup, the product of two subsets is always a subsemigroup; furthermore the power set of subsemigroups is a semiring with addition as union (of subsets) and multiplication as product of subsets.[14]


See also

-   Central product
-   Double coset


References

-

Category:Group theory Category:Binary operations

[1]

[2]

[3] Walter Ledermann, _Introduction to Group Theory_, 1976, Longman, , p. 52

[4] Nicholson, 2012, Theorem 5, p. 125

[5]

[6]

[7] Ballester-Bolinches, Esteban-Romero, Asaad, p. 24

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]