In topology and related areas of mathematics, a PRODUCT SPACE is the Cartesian product of a family of topological spaces equipped with a natural topology called the PRODUCT TOPOLOGY. This topology differs from another, perhaps more obvious, topology called the box topology, which can also be given to a product space and which agrees with the product topology when the product is over only finitely many spaces. However, the product topology is "correct" in that it makes the product space a categorical product of its factors, whereas the box topology is too fine; this is the sense in which the product topology is "natural".


Definition

Given _X_ such that

_X_ := ∏_(_i_ ∈ _I_)_X__(_i_)

is the Cartesian product of the topological spaces _X_(i)_, indexed by i ∈ I, and the CANONICAL PROJECTIONS _p_(i)_ : _X_ → _X_(i)_, the PRODUCT TOPOLOGY on _X_ is defined to be the coarsest topology (i.e. the topology with the fewest open sets) for which all the projections _p_(i)_ are continuous. The product topology is sometimes called the TYCHONOFF TOPOLOGY.

The open sets in the product topology are unions (finite or infinite) of sets of the form ∏_(i ∈ I)U_(i), where each _U_(i)_ is open in _X_(i)_ and _U__(_i_) ≠ _X__(_i_) for only finitely many _i_. In particular, for a finite product (in particular, for the product of two topological spaces), the set of all Cartesian products between one basis element from each _X_(i)_ gives a basis for the product topology of ∏_(i ∈ I)X_(i). That is, for a finite product, the set of all ∏_(i ∈ I)U_(i), where U_(i) is an element of the (chosen) basis of X_(i), is a basis for the product topology of ∏_(i ∈ I)X_(i).

The product topology on _X_ is the topology generated by sets of the form _p_(i)_^(−1)(_U_(i)_), where _i_ is in ''I '' and _U_(i)_ is an open subset of _X_(i)_. In other words, the sets {_p_(i)_^(−1)(_U_(i)_)} form a subbase for the topology on _X_. A subset of _X_ is open if and only if it is a (possibly infinite) union of intersections of finitely many sets of the form _p_(i)_^(−1)(_U_(i)_). The _p_(i)_^(−1)(_U_(i)_) are sometimes called open cylinders, and their intersections are cylinder sets.

In general, the product of the topologies of each _X_(i)_ forms a basis for what is called the box topology on _X_. In general, the box topology is finer than the product topology, but for finite products they coincide.


Examples

If one starts with the standard topology on the real line R and defines a topology on the product of _n_ copies of R in this fashion, one obtains the ordinary Euclidean topology on R^(_n_).

The Cantor set is homeomorphic to the product of countably many copies of the discrete space {0,1} and the space of irrational numbers is homeomorphic to the product of countably many copies of the natural numbers, where again each copy carries the discrete topology.

Several additional examples are given in the article on the initial topology.


Properties

The product space _X_, together with the canonical projections, can be characterized by the following universal property: If _Y_ is a topological space, and for every _i_ in _I_, _f_(i)_ : _Y_ → _X_(i)_ is a continuous map, then there exists _precisely one_ continuous map _f_ : _Y_ → _X_ such that for each _i_ in _I_ the following diagram commutes: CategoricalProduct-02.png This shows that the product space is a product in the category of topological spaces. It follows from the above universal property that a map _f_ : _Y_ → _X_ is continuous if and only if _f_(i)_ = _p_(i)_ o _f_ is continuous for all _i_ in _I_. In many cases it is easier to check that the component functions _f_(i)_ are continuous. Checking whether a map _f_ : _Y_ → _X_ is continuous is usually more difficult; one tries to use the fact that the _p_(i)_ are continuous in some way.

In addition to being continuous, the canonical projections _p_(i)_ : _X_ → _X_(i)_ are open maps. This means that any open subset of the product space remains open when projected down to the _X_(i)_. The converse is not true: if _W_ is a subspace of the product space whose projections down to all the _X_(i)_ are open, then _W_ need not be open in _X_. (Consider for instance _W_ = R² \ (0,1)².) The canonical projections are not generally closed maps (consider for example the closed set {(x, y) ∈ ℝ² ∣ xy = 1}, whose projections onto both axes are R \ {0}).

The product topology is also called the _topology of pointwise convergence_ because of the following fact: a sequence (or net) in _X_ converges if and only if all its projections to the spaces _X__(_i_) converge. In particular, if one considers the space _X_ = R^(_I_) of all real valued functions on _I_, convergence in the product topology is the same as pointwise convergence of functions.

Any product of closed subsets of _X_(i)_ is a closed set in _X_.

An important theorem about the product topology is Tychonoff's theorem: any product of compact spaces is compact. This is easy to show for finite products, while the general statement is equivalent to the axiom of choice.


Relation to other topological notions

-   Separation
    -   Every product of T₀ spaces is T₀
    -   Every product of T₁ spaces is T₁
    -   Every product of Hausdorff spaces is Hausdorff[1]
    -   Every product of regular spaces is regular
    -   Every product of Tychonoff spaces is Tychonoff
    -   A product of normal spaces _need not_ be normal
-   Compactness
    -   Every product of compact spaces is compact (Tychonoff's theorem)
    -   A product of locally compact spaces _need not_ be locally compact. However, an arbitrary product of locally compact spaces where all but finitely many are compact _is_ locally compact (This condition is sufficient and necessary).
-   Connectedness
    -   Every product of connected (resp. path-connected) spaces is connected (resp. path-connected)
    -   Every product of hereditarily disconnected spaces is hereditarily disconnected.
-   Metric spaces
    -   Countable products of metric spaces are metrizable


Axiom of choice

The axiom of choice is equivalent to the statement that the product of a collection of non-empty sets is non-empty. The proof is easy enough: one needs only to pick an element from each set to find a representative in the product. Conversely, a representative of the product is a set which contains exactly one element from each component.

The axiom of choice occurs again in the study of (topological) product spaces; for example, Tychonoff's theorem on compact sets is a more complex and subtle example of a statement that is equivalent to the axiom of choice.


See also

-   Disjoint union (topology)
-   Projective limit topology
-   Quotient space
-   Subspace (topology)


Notes


References

-


External links

-

Category:Topology Category:General topology Category:Binary operations

[1]