Pythagorean_theorem_-_Ani.gif A PYTHAGOREAN TRIPLE consists of three positive integers , , and , such that . Such a triple is commonly written , and a well-known example is . If is a Pythagorean triple, then so is for any positive integer . A PRIMITIVE PYTHAGOREAN TRIPLE is one in which , and are coprime (that is, they have no common divisor larger than 1).[1] A triangle whose sides form a Pythagorean triple is called a PYTHAGOREAN TRIANGLE, and is necessarily a right triangle.

The name is derived from the Pythagorean theorem, stating that every right triangle has side lengths satisfying the formula ; thus, Pythagorean triples describe the three integer side lengths of a right triangle. However, right triangles with non-integer sides do not form Pythagorean triples. For instance, the triangle with sides and is a right triangle, but is not a Pythagorean triple because is not an integer. Moreover, and do not have an integer common multiple because is irrational.

Pythagorean triples have been known since ancient times. The oldest known record comes from Plimpton 322, a Babylonian clay tablet from about 1800 BC, written in a sexagesimal number system. It was discovered by Edgar James Banks shortly after 1900, and sold to George Arthur Plimpton in 1922, for $10.[2]

When searching for integer solutions, the equation is a Diophantine equation. Thus Pythagorean triples are among the oldest known solutions of a nonlinear Diophantine equation.


Examples

Pythagorean_Triples_Scatter_Plot.png of the legs (a,b) of the first Pythagorean triples with a and b less than 6000. Negative values are included to illustrate the parabolic patterns.]]

There are 16 primitive Pythagorean triples with :

  -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
  (3, 4, 5)      (5, 12, 13)    (8, 15, 17)    (7, 24, 25)
  (20, 21, 29)   (12, 35, 37)   (9, 40, 41)    (28, 45, 53)
  (11, 60, 61)   (16, 63, 65)   (33, 56, 65)   (48, 55, 73)
  (13, 84, 85)   (36, 77, 85)   (39, 80, 89)   (65, 72, 97)
  -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------

Note, for example, that (6, 8, 10) is _not_ a primitive Pythagorean triple, as it is a multiple of (3, 4, 5). Each of these low-c points forms one of the more easily recognizable radiating lines in the scatter plot.

Additionally these are all the primitive Pythagorean triples with :

  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------
  (20, 99, 101)     (60, 91, 109)     (15, 112, 113)    (44, 117, 125)
  (88, 105, 137)    (17, 144, 145)    (24, 143, 145)    (51, 140, 149)
  (85, 132, 157)    (119, 120, 169)   (52, 165, 173)    (19, 180, 181)
  (57, 176, 185)    (104, 153, 185)   (95, 168, 193)    (28, 195, 197)
  (84, 187, 205)    (133, 156, 205)   (21, 220, 221)    (140, 171, 221)
  (60, 221, 229)    (105, 208, 233)   (120, 209, 241)   (32, 255, 257)
  (23, 264, 265)    (96, 247, 265)    (69, 260, 269)    (115, 252, 277)
  (160, 231, 281)   (161, 240, 289)   (68, 285, 293)
  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------


Generating a triple

PrimitivePythagoreanTriplesRev08.svg

Pythagorean_Triples_from_Grapher.png on the cone.]]

EUCLID'S FORMULA[3] is a fundamental formula for generating Pythagorean triples given an arbitrary pair of integers _m_ and _n_ with . The formula states that the integers

_a_ = _m_² − _n_²,  _b_ = 2_m__n_,  _c_ = _m_² + _n_²

form a Pythagorean triple. The triple generated by Euclid's formula is primitive if and only if _m_ and _n_ are coprime and not both odd. When both _m_ and _n_ are odd, then _a_, _b_, and _c_ will be even, and the triple will not be primitive; however, dividing _a_, _b_, and _c_ by 2 will yield a primitive triple when _m_ and _n_ are coprime and both odd.[4]

_Every_ primitive triple arises (after the exchange of _a_ and _b_, if _a_ is even) from a _unique pair_ of coprime numbers _m_, _n_, one of which is even. It follows that there are infinitely many primitive Pythagorean triples. This relationship of _a_, _b_ and _c_ to _m_ and _n_ from Euclid's formula is referenced throughout the rest of this article.

Despite generating all primitive triples, Euclid's formula does not produce all triples—for example, (9, 12, 15) cannot be generated using integer _m_ and _n_. This can be remedied by inserting an additional parameter _k_ to the formula. The following will generate all Pythagorean triples uniquely:

_a_ = _k_ ⋅ (_m_² − _n_²),  _b_ = _k_ ⋅ (2_m__n_),  _c_ = _k_ ⋅ (_m_² + _n_²)

where _m_, _n_, and _k_ are positive integers with , and with _m_ and _n_ coprime and not both odd.

That these formulas generate Pythagorean triples can be verified by expanding using elementary algebra and verifying that the result equals _c_². Since every Pythagorean triple can be divided through by some integer _k_ to obtain a primitive triple, every triple can be generated uniquely by using the formula with _m_ and _n_ to generate its primitive counterpart and then multiplying through by _k_ as in the last equation.

Many formulas for generating triples with particular properties have been developed since the time of Euclid.

Proof of Euclid's formula

That satisfaction of Euclid's formula by _a, b, c_ is sufficient for the triangle to be Pythagorean is apparent from the fact that for positive integers _m_ and _n_, _m_ > _n_, the _a, b,_ and _c_ given by the formula are all positive integers, and from the fact that

_a_² + _b_² = (_m_² − _n_²)² + (2_m__n_)² = (_m_² + _n_²)² = _c_².

A proof of the _necessity_ that _a, b, c_ be expressed by Euclid's formula for any primitive Pythagorean triple is as follows.[5] All such triples can be written as (_a_, _b_, _c_) where and _a_, _b_, _c_ are coprime. Thus _a_, _b_, _c_ are pairwise coprime (if a prime number divided two of them, it would be forced also to divide the third one). As _a_ and _b_ are coprime, one is odd, and one may suppose that it is _a_, by exchanging, if needed, _a_ and _b_. This implies that _b_ is even and _c_ is odd (if _b_ were odd, _c_ would be even, and _c_² would be a multiple of 4, while _a_² + _b_² would be congruent to 2 modulo 4, as an odd square is congruent to 1 modulo 4).

From a² + b² = c² we obtain c² − a² = b² and hence (c − a)(c + a) = b². Then $\tfrac{(c+a)}{b}=\tfrac{b}{(c-a)}$. Since $\tfrac{(c+a)}{b}$ is rational, we set it equal to $\tfrac{m}{n}$ in lowest terms. Thus $\tfrac{(c-a)}{b}=\tfrac{n}{m}$, being the reciprocal of $\tfrac{(c+a)}{b}$. Then solving

$$\frac{c}{b}+\frac{a}{b}=\frac{m}{n}, \quad \quad  \frac{c}{b}-\frac{a}{b}=\frac{n}{m}$$

for $\tfrac{c}{b}$ and $\tfrac{a}{b}$ gives

$$\frac{c}{b}=\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{m}{n}+\frac{n}{m}\right)=\frac{m^2+n^2}{2mn}, \quad \quad \frac{a}{b}=\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{m}{n}-\frac{n}{m}\right)=\frac{m^2-n^2}{2mn}.$$

As $\tfrac{m}{n}$ is fully reduced, _m_ and _n_ are coprime, and they cannot both be even. If they were both odd, the numerator of $\tfrac{m^2-n^2}{2mn}$ would be a multiple of 4 (because an odd square is congruent to 1 modulo 4), and the denominator 2_mn_ would not be a multiple of 4. Since 4 would be the minimum possible even factor in the numerator and 2 would be the maximum possible even factor in the denominator, this would imply _a_ to be even despite defining it as odd. Thus one of _m_ and _n_ is odd and the other is even, and the numerators of the two fractions with denominator 2_mn_ are odd. Thus these fractions are fully reduced (an odd prime dividing this denominator divides one of _m_ and _n_ but not the other; thus it does not divide _m_² ± _n_²). One may thus equate numerators with numerators and denominators with denominators, giving Euclid's formula

_a_ = _m_² − _n_²,  _b_ = 2_m__n_,  _c_ = _m_² + _n_²
with _m_ and _n_ coprime and of opposite parities.

A longer but more commonplace proof is given in Maor (2007)[6] and Sierpiński (2003).[7]. Another proof is given in , as an instance of a general method that applies to every homogeneous Diophantine equation of degree two.

Interpretation of parameters in Euclid's formula

Suppose the sides of a Pythagorean triangle have lengths , , and , and suppose the angle between the leg of length and the hypotenuse of length is denoted as . Then $\tan{\tfrac{\beta}{2}}=\tfrac{n}{m}$ and the full-angle trigonometric values are $\sin{\beta}=\tfrac{2mn}{m^2+n^2}$, $\cos{\beta}=\tfrac{m^2-n^2}{m^2+n^2}$, and $\tan{\beta}=\tfrac{2mn}{m^2-n^2}$.[8]

A variant

The following variant of Euclid's formula is sometimes more convenient, as being more symmetric in and (same parity condition on and ).

If and are two odd integers such that , then

$$a = mn ,\ \,  b =\frac {m^2 - n^2}{2} ,\ \, c = \frac{m^2 + n^2}{2}$$
are three integers that form a Pythagorean triple, which is primitive if and only if and are coprime. Conversely, every primitive Pythagorean triple arises (after the exchange of and , if is even) from a unique pair of coprime odd integers.


Elementary properties of primitive Pythagorean triples

General properties

The properties of a primitive Pythagorean triple with (without specifying which of _a_ or _b_ is even and which is odd) include:

-   $\tfrac{(c-a)(c-b)}{2}$ is always a perfect square.[9] As it is only a necessary condition but not a sufficient one, it can be used in checking if a given triple of numbers is _not_ a Pythagorean triple when they fail the test. For example, the triple passes the test that is a perfect square, but it is not a Pythagorean triple.
-   When a triple of numbers _a_, _b_ and _c_ forms a primitive Pythagorean triple, then and one-half of are both perfect squares; however this is not a sufficient condition, as the numbers pass the perfect squares test but are not a Pythagorean triple since .
-   At most one of _a_, _b_, _c_ is a square.[10]
-   The area of a Pythagorean triangle cannot be the square[11] or twice the square[12] of a natural number.
-   Exactly one of _a_, _b_ is odd; _c_ is odd.[13]
-   Exactly one of _a_, _b_ is divisible by 3.[14]
-   Exactly one of _a_, _b_ is divisible by 4.[15]
-   Exactly one of _a_, _b_, _c_ is divisible by 5.[16]
-   The largest number that always divides _abc_ is 60.[17]
-   All prime factors of _c_ are [[Pythagorean_prime|primes of the form . The point is _rational_ if and are rational numbers, that is, if there are coprime integers such that

$$\biggl(\frac{a}{c}\biggr)^2 + \biggl(\frac{b}{c}\biggr)^2=1.$$

By multiplying both members by , one can see that the rational points on the circle are in one-to-one correspondence with the primitive Pythagorean triples.

The unit circle may also be defined by a parametric equation

$$x=\frac{1-t^2}{1+t^2}\quad y=\frac{2t}{1+t^2}.$$
Euclid's formula for Pythagorean triples means that, except for , a point on the circle is rational if and only if the corresponding value of is a rational number.

Stereographic approach

Stereoprojzero.svg There is a correspondence between points on the unit circle with rational coordinates and primitive Pythagorean triples. At this point, Euclid's formulae can be derived either by methods of trigonometry or equivalently by using the stereographic projection.

For the stereographic approach, suppose that _P_′ is a point on the _x_-axis with rational coordinates

$$P' = \left(\frac{m}{n},0\right).$$

Then, it can be shown by basic algebra that the point _P_ has coordinates

$$P = \left(
 \frac{2\left(\frac{m}{n}\right)}{\left(\frac{m}{n}\right)^2+1},
 \frac{\left(\frac{m}{n}\right)^2-1}{\left(\frac{m}{n}\right)^2+1}
\right) =
\left(
 \frac{2mn}{m^2+n^2},
 \frac{m^2-n^2}{m^2+n^2}
\right).$$

This establishes that each rational point of the _x_-axis goes over to a rational point of the unit circle. The converse, that every rational point of the unit circle comes from such a point of the _x_-axis, follows by applying the inverse stereographic projection. Suppose that _P_(_x_, _y_) is a point of the unit circle with _x_ and _y_ rational numbers. Then the point _P_′ obtained by stereographic projection onto the _x_-axis has coordinates

$$\left(\frac{x}{1-y},0\right)$$

which is rational.

In terms of algebraic geometry, the algebraic variety of rational points on the unit circle is birational to the affine line over the rational numbers. The unit circle is thus called a rational curve, and it is this fact which enables an explicit parameterization of the (rational number) points on it by means of rational functions.


Pythagorean triangles in a 2D lattice

A 2D lattice is a regular array of isolated points where if any one point is chosen as the Cartesian origin (0, 0), then all the other points are at (_x_, _y_) where _x_ and _y_ range over all positive and negative integers. Any Pythagorean triangle with triple (_a_, _b_, _c_) can be drawn within a 2D lattice with vertices at coordinates (0, 0), (_a_, 0) and (0, _b_). The count of lattice points lying strictly within the bounds of the triangle is given by   $\tfrac{(a-1)(b-1)-\gcd{(a,b)}+1}{2};$[18] for primitive Pythagorean triples this interior lattice count is  $\tfrac{(a-1)(b-1)}{2}.$ The area (by Pick's theorem equal to one less than the interior lattice count plus half the boundary lattice count) equals  $\tfrac{ab}{2}$ .

The first occurrence of two primitive Pythagorean triples sharing the same area occurs with triangles with sides (20, 21, 29), (12, 35, 37) and common area 210 . The first occurrence of two primitive Pythagorean triples sharing the same interior lattice count occurs with (18108, 252685, 253333), (28077, 162964, 165365) and interior lattice count 2287674594 . Three primitive Pythagorean triples have been found sharing the same area: (4485,  5852,  7373), (3059, 8580, 9109), (1380, 19019, 19069) with area 13123110. As yet, no set of three primitive Pythagorean triples have been found sharing the same interior lattice count.


Enumeration of primitive Pythagorean triples

By Euclid's formula all primitive Pythagorean triples can be generated from integers m and n with m > n > 0, m + n odd and gcd (m, n) = 1. Hence there is a 1 to 1 mapping of rationals (in lowest terms) to primitive Pythagorean triples where $\tfrac{n}{m}$ is in the interval (0, 1) and m + n odd.

The reverse mapping from a primitive triple (a, b, c) where c > b > a > 0 to a rational $\tfrac{n}{m}$ is achieved by studying the two sums a + c and b + c. One of these sums will be a square that can be equated to (m + n)² and the other will be twice a square that can be equated to 2m². It is then possible to determine the rational $\tfrac{n}{m}$.

In order to enumerate primitive Pythagorean triples the rational can be expressed as an ordered pair (n, m) and mapped to an integer using a pairing function such as Cantor's pairing function. An example can be seen at . It begins

8, 18, 19, 32, 33, 34, …
and gives rationals

$$\tfrac{1}{2},\tfrac{2}{3},\tfrac{1}{4},\tfrac{3}{4},\tfrac{2}{5},\tfrac{1}{6},\dots$$
these, in turn, generate primitive triples

(3, 4, 5), (5, 12, 13), (8, 15, 17), (7, 24, 25), (20, 21, 29), (12, 35, 37), …


Spinors and the modular group

Pythagorean triples can likewise be encoded into a matrix of the form

$$X = \begin{bmatrix}
c+b & a\\
a & c-b
\end{bmatrix}.$$
A matrix of this form is symmetric. Furthermore, the determinant of _X_ is

det _X_ = _c_² − _a_² − _b_² 
which is zero precisely when (_a_,_b_,_c_) is a Pythagorean triple. If _X_ corresponds to a Pythagorean triple, then as a matrix it must have rank 1.

Since _X_ is symmetric, it follows from a result in linear algebra that there is a column vector [_m_ _n_]^(T)}} such that the outer product

holds, where the _T_ denotes the matrix transpose. The vector ξ is called a spinor (for the Lorentz group SO(1, 2)). In abstract terms, the Euclid formula means that each primitive Pythagorean triple can be written as the outer product with itself of a spinor with integer entries, as in ().

The modular group Γ is the set of 2×2 matrices with integer entries

$$A = \begin{bmatrix}\alpha&\beta\\ \gamma&\delta\end{bmatrix}$$

with determinant equal to one: 1}}. This set forms a group, since the inverse of a matrix in Γ is again in Γ, as is the product of two matrices in Γ. The modular group acts on the collection of all integer spinors. Furthermore, the group is transitive on the collection of integer spinors with relatively prime entries. For if [_m_ _n_]^(T) has relatively prime entries, then

$$\begin{bmatrix}m&-v\\n&u\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}1\\0\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}m\\n\end{bmatrix}$$

where _u_ and _v_ are selected (by the Euclidean algorithm) so that 1}}.

By acting on the spinor ξ in (), the action of Γ goes over to an action on Pythagorean triples, provided one allows for triples with possibly negative components. Thus if _A_ is a matrix in Γ, then

gives rise to an action on the matrix _X_ in (). This does not give a well-defined action on primitive triples, since it may take a primitive triple to an imprimitive one. It is convenient at this point (per ) to call a triple (_a_,_b_,_c_) STANDARD if and either (_a_,_b_,_c_) are relatively prime or (_a_/2,_b_/2,_c_/2) are relatively prime with _a_/2 odd. If the spinor [_m_ _n_]^(T) has relatively prime entries, then the associated triple (_a_,_b_,_c_) determined by () is a standard triple. It follows that the action of the modular group is transitive on the set of standard triples.

Alternatively, restrict attention to those values of _m_ and _n_ for which _m_ is odd and _n_ is even. Let the subgroup Γ(2) of Γ be the kernel of the group homomorphism

_Γ_ = _S__L_(2, Z) → _S__L_(2, Z₂)

where SL(2,Z₂) is the special linear group over the finite field Z₂ of integers modulo 2. Then Γ(2) is the group of unimodular transformations which preserve the parity of each entry. Thus if the first entry of ξ is odd and the second entry is even, then the same is true of _A_ξ for all . In fact, under the action (), the group Γ(2) acts transitively on the collection of primitive Pythagorean triples .

The group Γ(2) is the free group whose generators are the matrices

$$U=\begin{bmatrix}1&2\\0&1\end{bmatrix},\qquad L=\begin{bmatrix}1&0\\2&1\end{bmatrix}.$$
Consequently, every primitive Pythagorean triple can be obtained in a unique way as a product of copies of the matrices _U_ and _L_.


Parent/child relationships

By a result of , all primitive Pythagorean triples can be generated from the (3, 4, 5) triangle by using the three linear transformations T₁, T₂, T₃ below, where _a_, _b_, _c_ are sides of a triple:

  ----- -------------------- -------------------- ---------------------
        new side _a_         new side _b_         new side _c_
  T₁:   _a_ − 2_b_ + 2_c_    2_a_ − _b_ + 2_c_    2_a_ − 2_b_ + 3_c_
  T₂:   _a_ + 2_b_ + 2_c_    2_a_ + _b_ + 2_c_    2_a_ + 2_b_ + 3_c_
  T₃:   −_a_ + 2_b_ + 2_c_   −2_a_ + _b_ + 2_c_   −2_a_ + 2_b_ + 3_c_
  ----- -------------------- -------------------- ---------------------

In other words, every primitive triple will be a "parent" to three additional primitive triples. Starting from the initial node with _a_ = 3, _b_ = 4, and _c_ = 5, the operation T₁ produces the new triple

    (3 − (2×4) + (2×5), (2×3) − 4 + (2×5), (2×3) − (2×4) + (3×5)) = (5, 12, 13),

and similarly T₂ and T₃ produce the triples (21, 20, 29) and (15, 8, 17).

The linear transformations T₁, T₂, and T₃ have a geometric interpretation in the language of quadratic forms. They are closely related to (but are not equal to) reflections generating the orthogonal group of _x_² + _y_² − _z_² over the integers.[19]


Relation to Gaussian integers

Alternatively, Euclid's formulae can be analyzed and proven using the Gaussian integers.[20] Gaussian integers are complex numbers of the form _u_ + _vi_}}, where _u_ and _v_ are ordinary integers and _i_ is the square root of negative one. The units of Gaussian integers are ±1 and ±i. The ordinary integers are called the rational integers and denoted as Z. The Gaussian integers are denoted as Z[_i_]. The right-hand side of the Pythagorean theorem may be factored in Gaussian integers:

$$c^2 = a^2+b^2 = (a+bi)\overline{(a+bi)} = (a+bi)(a-bi).$$

A primitive Pythagorean triple is one in which _a_ and _b_ are coprime, i.e., they share no prime factors in the integers. For such a triple, either _a_ or _b_ is even, and the other is odd; from this, it follows that _c_ is also odd.

The two factors _a_ + _bi_}} and _a_ − _bi_}} of a primitive Pythagorean triple each equal the square of a Gaussian integer. This can be proved using the property that every Gaussian integer can be factored uniquely into Gaussian primes up to units.[21] (This unique factorization follows from the fact that, roughly speaking, a version of the Euclidean algorithm can be defined on them.) The proof has three steps. First, if _a_ and _b_ share no prime factors in the integers, then they also share no prime factors in the Gaussian integers. (Assume _a_ = _gu_ and _b_ = _gv_ with Gaussian integers _g_, _u_ and _v_ and _g_ not a unit. Then _u_ and _v_ lie on the same line through the origin. All Gaussian integers on such a line are integer multiples of some Gaussian integer _h_. But then the integer _gh_ ≠ ±1 divides both _a_ and _b_.) Second, it follows that _z_ and _z*_ likewise share no prime factors in the Gaussian integers. For if they did, then their common divisor δ would also divide _z_ + _z*_ = 2_a_ and _z_ − _z*_ = 2_ib_. Since _a_ and _b_ are coprime, that implies that δ divides 2 = (1 + i)(1 − i) = i(1 − i)². From the formula _c_² = _zz*_, that in turn would imply that _c_ is even, contrary to the hypothesis of a primitive Pythagorean triple. Third, since _c_² is a square, every Gaussian prime in its factorization is doubled, i.e., appears an even number of times. Since _z_ and _z*_ share no prime factors, this doubling is also true for them. Hence, _z_ and _z*_ are squares.

Thus, the first factor can be written

_a_ + _b__i_ = _ε_(_m_+_n__i_)², _ε_ ∈ { ± 1,  ± _i_}.

The real and imaginary parts of this equation give the two formulas:

$$\begin{cases}\varepsilon = +1, & \quad a = +\left( m^2 - n^2 \right),\quad b = +2mn; \\ \varepsilon = -1, & \quad a = -\left( m^2 - n^2 \right),\quad b = -2mn; \\ \varepsilon = +i, & \quad a = -2mn,\quad b = +\left( m^2 - n^2 \right); \\ \varepsilon = -i, &  \quad a = +2mn,\quad b = -\left( m^2 - n^2 \right).\end{cases}$$

For any primitive Pythagorean triple, there must be integers _m_ and _n_ such that these two equations are satisfied. Hence, every Pythagorean triple can be generated from some choice of these integers.

As perfect square Gaussian integers

If we consider the square of a Gaussian integer we get the following direct interpretation of Euclid's formulae as representing a perfect square Gaussian integers.

(_m_ + _n__i_)² = (_m_² − _n_²) + 2_m__n__i_.

Using the facts that the Gaussian integers are a Euclidean domain and that for a Gaussian integer p |p|² is always a square it is possible to show that a Pythagorean triples correspond to the square of a prime Gaussian integer if the hypotenuse is prime.

If the Gaussian integer is not prime then it is the product of two Gaussian integers p and q with |p|² and |q|² integers. Since magnitudes multiply in the Gaussian integers, the product must be |p||q|, which when squared to find a Pythagorean triple must be composite. The contrapositive completes the proof.


Relation to ellipses with integral dimensions

Pythagorean_triples_in_ellipses.svg With reference to the figure and the definition of the foci of an ellipse, F₁ and F₂, for any point P on the ellipse, F₁P + PF₂ is constant.

As points A and B are both on the ellipse, F₁A + AF₂ = F₁B + BF₂. Due to symmetry, F₁A + AF₂ = F₂A' + AF₂ = AA' = 2 AC, and F₁B + BF₂ = 2 BF₂. Hence, AC = BF₂.

Thus, if BCF₂ is a right-angle triangle with integral sides, the separation of the foci, linear eccentricity, minor axis and major axis are all also integers.[22]


Distribution of triples

Pythagorean_triple_scatterplot.svg of the legs (_a_,_b_) of the first Pythagorean triples with _a_ and _b_ less than 4500.]]

There are a number of results on the distribution of Pythagorean triples. In the scatter plot, a number of obvious patterns are already apparent. Whenever the legs (_a_,_b_) of a primitive triple appear in the plot, all integer multiples of (_a_,_b_) must also appear in the plot, and this property produces the appearance of lines radiating from the origin in the diagram.

Within the scatter, there are sets of parabolic patterns with a high density of points and all their foci at the origin, opening up in all four directions. Different parabolas intersect at the axes and appear to reflect off the axis with an incidence angle of 45 degrees, with a third parabola entering in a perpendicular fashion. Within this quadrant, each arc centered on the origin shows that section of the parabola that lies between its tip and its intersection with its semi-latus rectum.

These patterns can be explained as follows. If a²/4n is an integer, then (_a_, |n − a²/4n|, n + a²/4n) is a Pythagorean triple. (In fact every Pythagorean triple (_a_, _b_, _c_) can be written in this way with integer _n_, possibly after exchanging _a_ and _b_, since n = (b + c)/2 and _a_ and _b_ cannot both be odd.) The Pythagorean triples thus lie on curves given by b = |n − a²/4n|, that is, parabolas reflected at the _a_-axis, and the corresponding curves with _a_ and _b_ interchanged. If _a_ is varied for a given _n_ (i.e. on a given parabola), integer values of _b_ occur relatively frequently if _n_ is a square or a small multiple of a square. If several such values happen to lie close together, the corresponding parabolas approximately coincide, and the triples cluster in a narrow parabolic strip. For instance, 38² = 1444, 2 × 27² = 1458, 3 × 22² = 1452, 5 × 17² = 1445 and 10 × 12² = 1440; the corresponding parabolic strip around _n_ ≈ 1450 is clearly visible in the scatter plot.

The angular properties described above follow immediately from the functional form of the parabolas. The parabolas are reflected at the _a_-axis at _a_ = 2_n_, and the derivative of _b_ with respect to _a_ at this point is –1; hence the incidence angle is 45°. Since the clusters, like all triples, are repeated at integer multiples, the value 2_n_ also corresponds to a cluster. The corresponding parabola intersects the _b_-axis at right angles at _b_ = 2_n_, and hence its reflection upon interchange of _a_ and _b_ intersects the _a_-axis at right angles at _a_ = 2_n_, precisely where the parabola for _n_ is reflected at the _a_-axis. (The same is of course true for _a_ and _b_ interchanged.)

Albert Fässler and others provide insights into the significance of these parabolas in the context of conformal mappings.[23][24]


Special cases and related equations

The Platonic sequence

The case _n_ = 1 of the more general construction of Pythagorean triples has been known for a long time. Proclus, in his commentary to the 47th Proposition of the first book of Euclid's Elements, describes it as follows:

  Certain methods for the discovery of triangles of this kind are handed down, one which they refer to Plato, and another to Pythagoras. (The latter) starts from odd numbers. For it makes the odd number the smaller of the sides about the right angle; then it takes the square of it, subtracts unity and makes half the difference the greater of the sides about the right angle; lastly it adds unity to this and so forms the remaining side, the hypotenuse.
  ...For the method of Plato argues from even numbers. It takes the given even number and makes it one of the sides about the right angle; then, bisecting this number and squaring the half, it adds unity to the square to form the hypotenuse, and subtracts unity from the square to form the other side about the right angle. ... Thus it has formed the same triangle that which was obtained by the other method.

In equation form, this becomes:

_a_ is odd (Pythagoras, c. 540 BC):

$$\text{side }a : \text{side }b = {a^2 - 1 \over 2} : \text{side }c = {a^2 + 1 \over 2}.$$

_a_ is even (Plato, c. 380 BC):

$$\text{side }a : \text{side }b = \left({a \over 2}\right)^2 - 1 : \text{side }c = \left({a \over 2}\right)^2 + 1$$

It can be shown that all Pythagorean triples can be obtained, with appropriate rescaling, from the basic Platonic sequence (_a_, and ) by allowing _a_ to take non-integer rational values. If _a_ is replaced with the fraction _m_/_n_ in the sequence, the result is equal to the 'standard' triple generator (2_mn_, ,) after rescaling. It follows that every triple has a corresponding rational _a_ value which can be used to generate a similar triangle (one with the same three angles and with sides in the same proportions as the original). For example, the Platonic equivalent of (56, 33, 65) is generated by _a_ = _m_/_n_ = 7/4 as (_a_, (_a_² –1)/2, (_a_²+1)/2) = (56/32, 33/32, 65/32). The Platonic sequence itself can be derived by following the steps for 'splitting the square' described in Diophantus II.VIII.

The Jacobi–Madden equation

The equation,

_a_⁴ + _b_⁴ + _c_⁴ + _d_⁴ = (_a_ + _b_ + _c_ + _d_)⁴

is equivalent to the special Pythagorean triple,

(_a_² + _a__b_ + _b_²)² + (_c_² + _c__d_ + _d_²)² = ((_a_ + _b_)² + (_a_ + _b_)(_c_ + _d_) + (_c_ + _d_)²)²

There is an infinite number of solutions to this equation as solving for the variables involves an elliptic curve. Small ones are,

_a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ =  − 2634, 955, 1770, 5400

_a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ =  − 31764, 7590, 27385, 48150

Equal sums of two squares

One way to generate solutions to a² + b² = c² + d² is to parametrize _a, b, c, d_ in terms of integers _m, n, p, q_ as follows:[25]

(_m_² + _n_²)(_p_² + _q_²) = (_m__p_ − _n__q_)² + (_n__p_ + _m__q_)² = (_m__p_ + _n__q_)² + (_n__p_ − _m__q_)².

Equal sums of two fourth powers

Given two sets of Pythagorean triples,

(_a_² − _b_²)² + (2_a__b_)² = (_a_² + _b_²)²

(_c_² − _d_²)² + (2_c__d_)² = (_c_² + _d_²)²

the problem of finding equal products of a non-hypotenuse side and the hypotenuse,

(_a_² − _b_²)(_a_² + _b_²) = (_c_² − _d_²)(_c_² + _d_²)

is easily seen to be equivalent to the equation,

_a_⁴ − _b_⁴ = _c_⁴ − _d_⁴

and was first solved by Euler as a, b, c, d = 133, 59, 158, 134. Since he showed this is a rational point in an elliptic curve, then there is an infinite number of solutions. In fact, he also found a 7th degree polynomial parameterization.

Descartes' Circle Theorem

For the case of Descartes' circle theorem where all variables are squares,

2(_a_⁴ + _b_⁴ + _c_⁴ + _d_⁴) = (_a_² + _b_² + _c_² + _d_²)²

Euler showed this is equivalent to three simultaneous Pythagorean triples,

(2_a__b_)² + (2_c__d_)² = (_a_² + _b_² − _c_² − _d_²)²

(2_a__c_)² + (2_b__d_)² = (_a_² − _b_² + _c_² − _d_²)²

(2_a__d_)² + (2_b__c_)² = (_a_² − _b_² − _c_² + _d_²)²

There is also an infinite number of solutions, and for the special case when a + b = c, then the equation simplifies to,

4(_a_² + _a__b_ + _b_²) = _d_²

with small solutions as a, b, c, d = 3, 5, 8, 14 and can be solved as binary quadratic forms.

Almost-isosceles Pythagorean triples

No Pythagorean triples are isosceles, because the ratio of the hypotenuse to either other side is , but [[Square_root_of_2#Proofs_of_irrationality| is called a Pythagorean quadruple. The simplest example is (1, 2, 2, 3), since 1² + 2² + 2² = 3². The next simplest (primitive) example is (2, 3, 6, 7), since 2² + 3² + 6² = 7².

All quadruples are given by the formula

(_m_² + _n_² − _p_² − _q_²)² + (2_m__q_ + 2_n__p_)² + (2_n__q_ − 2_m__p_)² = (_m_² + _n_² + _p_² + _q_²)².

Pythagorean _n_-tuple

Using the simple algebraic identity,

(_x_₁² − _x_₀)² + (2_x_₁)²_x_₀ = (_x_₁² + _x_₀)²

for arbitrary _x_₀, _x_₁, it is easy to prove that the square of the sum of _n_ squares is itself the sum of _n_ squares by letting _x_₀ = _x_₂² + _x_₃² + ... + _x__(_n_)² and then distributing terms.[26] One can see how Pythagorean triples and quadruples are just the particular cases _x_₀ = _x_₂² and _x_₀ = _x_₂² + _x_₃², respectively, and so on for other _n_, with quintuples given by

(_a_² − _b_² − _c_² − _d_²)² + (2_a__b_)² + (2_a__c_)² + (2_a__d_)² = (_a_² + _b_² + _c_² + _d_²)².

Since the sum _F_(_k_,_m_) of _k_ consecutive squares beginning with _m_² is given by the formula,[27]

$$F(k,m)=km(k-1+m)+\frac{k(k-1)(2k-1)}{6}$$

one may find values (_k_, _m_) so that _F_(_k_,_m_) is a square, such as one by Hirschhorn where the number of terms is itself a square,[28]

$$m=\tfrac{v^4-24v^2-25}{48},\; k=v^2,\; F(m,k)=\tfrac{v^5+47v}{48}$$

and _v_ ≥ 5 is any integer not divisible by 2 or 3. For the smallest case _v_ = 5, hence _k_ = 25, this yields the well-known cannonball-stacking problem of Lucas,

0² + 1² + 2² + … + 24² = 70²

a fact which is connected to the Leech lattice.

In addition, if in a Pythagorean _n_-tuple (_n_ ≥ 4) all addends are consecutive except one, one can use the equation,[29]

_F_(_k_, _m_) + _p_² = (_p_ + 1)²

Since the second power of _p_ cancels out, this is only linear and easily solved for as $p=\tfrac{F(k,m)-1}{2}$ though _k_, _m_ should be chosen so that _p_ is an integer, with a small example being _k_ = 5, _m_ = 1 yielding,

1² + 2² + 3² + 4² + 5² + 27² = 28²

Thus, one way of generating Pythagorean _n_-tuples is by using, for various _x_,[30]

_x_² + (_x_ + 1)² + ⋯ + (_x_ + _q_)² + _p_² = (_p_ + 1)²,

where _q = n_–2 and where

$$p=\frac{(q+1)x^2+q(q+1)x+\frac{q(q+1)(2q+1)}{6} -1}{2}.$$

Fermat's Last Theorem

A generalization of the concept of Pythagorean triples is the search for triples of positive integers _a_, _b_, and _c_, such that _c_^(_n_)}}, for some _n_ strictly greater than 2. Pierre de Fermat in 1637 claimed that no such triple exists, a claim that came to be known as Fermat's Last Theorem because it took longer than any other conjecture by Fermat to be proven or disproven. The first proof was given by Andrew Wiles in 1994.

_n_ − 1 or _n_ _n_th powers summing to an _n_th power

Another generalization is searching for sequences of _n_ + 1 positive integers for which the _n_th power of the last is the sum of the _n_th powers of the previous terms. The smallest sequences for known values of _n_ are:

-   _n_ = 3: {3, 4, 5; 6}.
-   _n_ = 4: {30, 120, 272, 315; 353}
-   _n_ = 5: {19, 43, 46, 47, 67; 72}
-   _n_ = 7: {127, 258, 266, 413, 430, 439, 525; 568}
-   _n_ = 8: {90, 223, 478, 524, 748, 1088, 1190, 1324; 1409}

For the _n_=3 case, in which x³ + y³ + z³ = w³, called the Fermat cubic, a general formula exists giving all solutions.

A slightly different generalization allows the sum of (_k_ + 1) _n_th powers to equal the sum of (_n_ − _k_) _n_th powers. For example:

-   (_n_ = 3): 1³ + 12³ = 9³ + 10³, made famous by Hardy's recollection of a conversation with Ramanujan about the number 1729 being the smallest number that can be expressed as a sum of two cubes in two distinct ways.

There can also exist _n_ − 1 positive integers whose _n_th powers sum to an _n_th power (though, by Fermat's last theorem, not for _n_ = 3); these are counterexamples to Euler's sum of powers conjecture. The smallest known counterexamples are[31][32][33]

-   _n_ = 4: (95800, 217519, 414560; 422481)
-   _n_ = 5: (27, 84, 110, 133; 144)

Heronian triangle triples

A HERONIAN TRIANGLE is commonly defined as one with integer sides whose area is also an integer, and we shall consider Heronian triangles with _distinct_ integer sides. The lengths of the sides of such a triangle form a HERONIAN TRIPLE (_a, b, c_) provided _a_ < _b_ < _c_. Clearly, any Pythagorean triple is a Heronian triple, since in a Pythagorean triple at least one of the legs _a_, _b_ must be even, so that the area _ab_/2 is an integer. Not every Heronian triple is a Pythagorean triple, however, as the example (4, 13, 15) with area 24 shows.

If (_a_, _b_, _c_) is a Heronian triple, so is (_ma_, _mb_, _mc_) where _m_ is any positive integer greater than one. The Heronian triple (_a_, _b_, _c_) is PRIMITIVE provided _a_, _b_, _c_ are pairwise relatively prime (as with a Pythagorean triple). Here are a few of the simplest primitive Heronian triples that are not Pythagorean triples:

    (4, 13, 15) with area 24
    (3, 25, 26) with area 36
    (7, 15, 20) with area 42
    (6, 25, 29) with area 60
    (11, 13, 20) with area 66
    (13, 14, 15) with area 84
    (13, 20, 21) with area 126

By Heron's formula, the extra condition for a triple of positive integers (_a_, _b_, _c_) with _a_ < _b_ < _c_ to be Heronian is that



        (_a_² + _b_² + _c_²)² − 2(_a_⁴ + _b_⁴ + _c_⁴)

or equivalently



        2(_a_²_b_² + _a_²_c_² + _b_²_c_²) − (_a_⁴ + _b_⁴ + _c_⁴)

be a nonzero perfect square divisible by 16.

Application to cryptography

Primitive Pythagorean triples have been used in cryptography as random sequences and for the generation of keys.[34]


See also

-   Boolean Pythagorean triples problem
-   Congruum
-   Diophantus II.VIII
-   Eisenstein triple
-   Euler brick
-   Heronian triangle
-   Hilbert's theorem 90
-   Integer triangle
-   Modular arithmetic
-   Nonhypotenuse number
-   Plimpton 322
-   Pythagorean prime
-   Pythagorean quadruple
-   Tangent half-angle formula
-   Trigonometric identity


Notes


References

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   {{ citation | first1 = Calvin T. | last1 = Long | year = 1972 | title = Elementary Introduction to Number Theory | edition = 2nd | publisher = D. C. Heath and Company | location = Lexington | lccn = 77171950 }}
-   -   -   -   -


External links

-   -   Pythagorean Triples at cut-the-knot Interactive Applet showing unit circle relationships to Pythagorean Triples
-   The Trinary Tree(s) underlying Primitive Pythagorean Triples at cut-the-knot
-   Theoretical properties of the Pythagorean Triples and connections to geometry
-   Clifford Algebras and Euclid's Parameterization of Pythagorean triples
-   Pythagorean Triplets
-   Discussion of Properties of Pythagorean triples, Interactive Calculators, Puzzles and Problems
-   Generating Pythagorean Triples Using Arithmetic Progressions
-   Parameterization of Pythagorean Triples by a single triple of polynomials
-   Curious Consequences of a Miscopied Quadratic
-   Solutions to Quadratic Compatible Pairs in relation to Pythagorean Triples
-   The negative Pell equation and Pythagorean triples
-   The Remarkable Incircle of a Triangle
-   Interactive Calculator for Pythagorean Triples
-   -   Pythagorean Triples and the Unit Circle, chap. 2–3, in "A Friendly Introduction to Number Theory" by Joseph H. Silverman, 3rd ed., 2006, Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ,

no:Pythagoras’ læresetning#Pytagoreiske tripler

Category:Arithmetic problems of plane geometry Category:Diophantine equations Triple Category:Squares in number theory Category:Triangle geometry

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6] Maor, Eli, _The Pythagorean Theorem_, Princeton University Press, 2007: Appendix B.

[7]

[8]

[9] .

[10] For the nonexistence of solutions where _a_ and _b_ are both square, originally proved by Fermat, see . For the other case, in which _c_ is one of the squares, see .

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]  See also _Werke_, 2:67–148.

[22]

[23] 1988 Preprint See Figure 2 on page 3., later published as

[24]  as PDF

[25] Nahin, Paul. _An Imaginary Tale: The Story of_ , pp. 25–26.

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30] Goehl, John F., Jr., "Triples, quartets, pentads", _Mathematics Teacher_ 98, May 2005, p. 580.

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34] Kak, S. and Prabhu, M. Cryptographic applications of primitive Pythagorean triples. Cryptologia, 38:215–222, 2014. 1