In theoretical computer science and formal language theory, a REGULAR LANGUAGE (also called a RATIONAL LANGUAGE[1][2]) is a formal language that can be expressed using a regular expression, in the strict sense of the latter notion used in theoretical computer science (as opposed to many regular expressions engines provided by modern programming languages, which are augmented with features that allow recognition of languages that cannot be expressed by a classic regular expression).

Alternatively, a regular language can be defined as a language recognized by a finite automaton. The equivalence of regular expressions and finite automata is known as KLEENE'S THEOREM[3] (after American mathematician Stephen Cole Kleene). In the Chomsky hierarchy, regular languages are defined to be the languages that are generated by Type-3 grammars (regular grammars).

Regular languages are very useful in input parsing and programming language design.


Formal definition

The collection of regular languages over an alphabet Σ is defined recursively as follows:

-   The empty language Ø, and the empty string language {ε} are regular languages.
-   For each _a_ ∈ Σ (_a_ belongs to Σ), the singleton language {_a_} is a regular language.
-   If _A_ and _B_ are regular languages, then _A_ ∪ _B_ (union), _A_ • _B_ (concatenation), and _A_* (Kleene star) are regular languages.
-   No other languages over Σ are regular.

See regular expression for its syntax and semantics. Note that the above cases are in effect the defining rules of regular expression.


Examples

All finite languages are regular; in particular the empty string language {ε} = Ø* is regular. Other typical examples include the language consisting of all strings over the alphabet {_a_, _b_} which contain an even number of _a_s, or the language consisting of all strings of the form: several _a_s followed by several _b_s.

A simple example of a language that is not regular is the set of strings { _a_^(_n_)_b_^(_n_) | _n_ ≥ 0 }.[4] Intuitively, it cannot be recognized with a finite automaton, since a finite automaton has finite memory and it cannot remember the exact number of a's. Techniques to prove this fact rigorously are given below.


Equivalent formalisms

A regular language satisfies the following equivalent properties:

1.  it is the language of a regular expression (by the above definition)
2.  it is the language accepted by a nondeterministic finite automaton (NFA)[5][6]
3.  it is the language accepted by a deterministic finite automaton (DFA)[7][8]
4.  it can be generated by a regular grammar[9][10]
5.  it is the language accepted by an alternating finite automaton
6.  it can be generated by a prefix grammar
7.  it can be accepted by a read-only Turing machine
8.  it can be defined in monadic second-order logic (Büchi–Elgot–Trakhtenbrot theorem[11])
9.  it is recognized by some finite monoid _M_, meaning it is the preimage { _w_∈Σ^(*) | _f_(_w_)∈_S_ } of a subset _S_ of a finite monoid _M_ under a monoid homomorphism _f_: Σ^(*) → _M_ from the free monoid on its alphabet[12]
10. the number of equivalence classes of its syntactic congruence is finite.[13][14] (This number equals the number of states of the minimal deterministic finite automaton accepting _L_.)

Properties 9. and 10. are purely algebraic approaches to define regular languages; a similar set of statements can be formulated for a monoid _M_⊂Σ^(*). In this case, equivalence over _M_ leads to the concept of a recognizable language.

Some authors use one of the above properties different from "1." as an alternative definition of regular languages.

Some of the equivalences above, particularly those among the first four formalisms, are called _Kleene's theorem_ in textbooks. Precisely which one (or which subset) is called such varies between authors. One textbook calls the equivalence of regular expressions and NFAs ("1." and "2." above) "Kleene's theorem".[15] Another textbook calls the equivalence of regular expressions and DFAs ("1." and "3." above) "Kleene's theorem".[16] Two other textbooks first prove the expressive equivalence of NFAs and DFAs ("2." and "3.") and then state "Kleene's theorem" as the equivalence between regular expressions and finite automata (the latter said to describe "recognizable languages").[17][18] A linguistically oriented text first equates regular grammars ("4." above) with DFAs and NFAs, calls the languages generated by (any of) these "regular", after which it introduces regular expressions which it terms to describe "rational languages", and finally states "Kleene's theorem" as the coincidence of regular and rational languages.[19] Other authors simply _define_ "rational expression" and "regular expressions" as synonymous and do the same with "rational languages" and "regular languages".[20][21]


Closure properties

The regular languages are closed under various operations, that is, if the languages _K_ and _L_ are regular, so is the result of the following operations:

-   the set theoretic Boolean operations: union _K_ ∪ _L_, intersection _K_ ∩ _L_, and complement , hence also relative complement _K_ - _L_.[22]
-   the regular operations: _K_ ∪ _L_, concatenation _K_ ∘ _L_, and Kleene star _L_^(*).[23]
-   the trio operations: string homomorphism, inverse string homomorphism, and intersection with regular languages. As a consequence they are closed under arbitrary finite state transductions, like quotient _K_ / _L_ with a regular language. Even more, regular languages are closed under quotients with _arbitrary_ languages: If _L_ is regular then _L_ / _K_ is regular for any _K_.
-   the reverse (or mirror image) _L_^(R).[24] Given a nondeterministic finite automaton to recognize _L_, an automaton for _L_^(R) can be obtained by reversing all transitions and interchanging starting and finishing states. This may result in multiple starting states; ε-transitions can be used to join them.


Decidability properties

Given two deterministic finite automata _A_ and _B_, it is decidable whether they accept the same language.[25] As a consequence, using the above closure properties, the following problems are also decidable for arbitrarily given deterministic finite automata _A_ and _B_, with accepted languages _L__(_A_) and _L__(_B_), respectively:

-   Containment: is _L__(_A_) ⊆ _L__(_B_) ?[26]
-   Disjointness: is _L__(_A_) ∩ _L__(_B_) = {} ?
-   Emptiness: is _L__(_A_) = {} ?
-   Universality: is _L__(_A_) = Σ^(*) ?
-   Membership: given _a_ ∈ Σ^(*), is _a_ ∈ _L__(_B_) ?

For regular expressions, the universality problem is NP-complete already for a singleton alphabet.[27] For larger alphabets, that problem is PSPACE-complete.[28] If regular expressions are extended to allow also a _squaring operator_, with "_A_²" denoting the same as "_AA_", still just regular languages can be described, but the universality problem has an exponential space lower bound,[29][30][31] and is in fact complete for exponential space with respect to polynomial-time reduction.[32]


Complexity results

In computational complexity theory, the complexity class of all regular languages is sometimes referred to as REGULAR or REG and equals DSPACE(O(1)), the decision problems that can be solved in constant space (the space used is independent of the input size). REGULAR ≠ AC⁰, since it (trivially) contains the parity problem of determining whether the number of 1 bits in the input is even or odd and this problem is not in AC⁰.[33] On the other hand, REGULAR does not contain AC⁰, because the nonregular language of palindromes, or the nonregular language {0^(n)1^(n) : n ∈ ℕ} can both be recognized in AC⁰.[34]

If a language is _not_ regular, it requires a machine with at least Ω(log log _n_) space to recognize (where _n_ is the input size).[35] In other words, DSPACE(o(log log _n_)) equals the class of regular languages. In practice, most nonregular problems are solved by machines taking at least logarithmic space.


Location in the Chomsky hierarchy

Chomsky-hierarchy.svg To locate the regular languages in the Chomsky hierarchy, one notices that every regular language is context-free. The converse is not true: for example the language consisting of all strings having the same number of _a_'s as _b_'s is context-free but not regular. To prove that a language such as this is not regular, one often uses the Myhill–Nerode theorem or the pumping lemma among other methods.[36]

Important subclasses of regular languages include

-   Finite languages - those containing only a finite number of words.[37] These are regular languages, as one can create a regular expression that is the union of every word in the language.
-   Star-free languages, those that can be described by a regular expression constructed from the empty symbol, letters, concatenation and all boolean operators including complementation but not the Kleene star: this class includes all finite languages.[38]


The number of words in a regular language

Let s_(L)(n) denote the number of words of length n in L. The ordinary generating function for _L_ is the formal power series

_S__(_L_)(_z_) = ∑_(_n_ ≥ 0)_s__(_L_)(_n_)_z_^(_n_) .

The generating function of a language _L_ is a rational function if _L_ is regular.[39] Hence for every regular language L the sequence s_(L)(n)_(n ≥ 0) is constant-recursive; that is, there exist an integer constant n₀, complex constants λ₁, …, λ_(k) and complex polynomials p₁(x), …, p_(k)(x) such that for every n ≥ n₀ the number s_(L)(n) of words of length n in L is $s_L(n)=p_1(n)\lambda_1^n+\dotsb+p_k(n)\lambda_k^n$.[40][41][42][43]

Thus, non-regularity of certain languages L′ can be proved by counting the words of a given length in L′. Consider, for example, the Dyck language of strings of balanced parentheses. The number of words of length 2n in the Dyck language is equal to the Catalan number $C_n\sim\frac{4^n}{n^{3/2}\sqrt{\pi}}$, which is not of the form p(n)λ^(n), witnessing the non-regularity of the Dyck language. Care must be taken since some of the eigenvalues λ_(i) could have the same magnitude. For example, the number of words of length n in the language of all even binary words is not of the form p(n)λ^(n), but the number of words of even or odd length are of this form; the corresponding eigenvalues are 2,  − 2. In general, for every regular language there exists a constant d such that for all a, the number of words of length dm + a is asymptotically C_(a)m^(p_(a))λ_(a)^(m).[44]

The _zeta function_ of a language _L_ is[45]

$$\zeta_L(z) = \exp \left({ \sum_{n \ge 0} s_L(n) \frac{z^n}{n} }\right) \ .$$

The zeta function of a regular language is not in general rational, but that of an arbitrary cyclic language is.[46][47]


Generalizations

The notion of a regular language has been generalized to infinite words (see ω-automata) and to trees (see tree automaton).

Rational set generalizes the notion (of regular/rational language) to monoids that are not necessarily free. Likewise, the notion of a recognizable language (by a finite automaton) has namesake as recognizable set over a monoid that is not necessarily free. Howard Straubing notes in relation to these facts that “The term "regular language" is a bit unfortunate. Papers influenced by Eilenberg's monograph[48] often use either the term "recognizable language", which refers to the behavior of automata, or "rational language", which refers to important analogies between regular expressions and rational power series. (In fact, Eilenberg defines rational and recognizable subsets of arbitrary monoids; the two notions do not, in general, coincide.) This terminology, while better motivated, never really caught on, and "regular language" is used almost universally.”[49]

Rational series is another generalization, this time in the context of a formal power series over a semiring. This approach gives rise to weighted rational expressions and weighted automata. In this algebraic context, the regular languages (corresponding to Boolean-weighted rational expressions) are usually called _rational languages_.[50][51] Also in this context, Kleene's theorem finds a generalization called the Kleene-Schützenberger theorem.


Induction


Notes


References

-   -   -   -   Chapter 1: Regular Languages, pp. 31–90. Subsection "Decidable Problems Concerning Regular Languages" of section 4.1: Decidable Languages, pp. 152–155.

-   Philippe Flajolet and Robert Sedgewick, _Analytic Combinatorics: Symbolic Combinatorics._ Online book, 2002.
-   -


Further reading

-   Kleene, S.C.: Representation of events in nerve nets and finite automata. In: Shannon, C.E., McCarthy, J. (eds.) Automata Studies, pp. 3–41. Princeton University Press, Princeton (1956); it is a slightly modified version of his 1951 RAND Corporation report of the same title, RM704.
-


External links

-   -

Category:Formal languages Category:Finite automata

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] Eilenberg (1974), p. 16 (Example II, 2.8) and p. 25 (Example II, 5.2).

[5] 1. ⇒ 2. by Thompson's construction algorithm

[6] 2. ⇒ 1. by Kleene's algorithm or using Arden's lemma

[7] 2. ⇒ 3. by the powerset construction

[8] 3. ⇒ 2. since the former definition is stronger than the latter

[9] 2. ⇒ 4. see Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), Theorem 9.2, p.219

[10] 4. ⇒ 2. see Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), Theorem 9.1, p.218

[11] M. Weyer: Chapter 12 - Decidability of S1S and S2S, p. 219, Theorem 12.26. In: Erich Grädel, Wolfgang Thomas, Thomas Wilke (Eds.): Automata, Logics, and Infinite Games: A Guide to Current Research. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2500, Springer 2002.

[12] 3. ⇔ 9. by the Myhill–Nerode theorem

[13] _u_~_v_ is defined as: _uw_∈_L_ if and only if _vw_∈_L_ for all _w_∈Σ^(*)

[14] 3. ⇔ 10. see the proof in the _Syntactic monoid_ article, and see p.160 in

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22] Salomaa (1981) p.28

[23] Salomaa (1981) p.27

[24] Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), Chapter 3, Exercise 3.4g, p. 72

[25] Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), Theorem 3.8, p.64; see also Theorem 3.10, p.67

[26] Check if _L__(_A_) ∩ _L__(_B_) = _L__(_A_). Deciding this property is NP-hard in general; see :File:RegSubsetNP.pdf for an illustration of the proof idea.

[27] Aho, Hopcroft, Ullman (1974), Exercise 10.14, p.401

[28] Aho, Hopcroft, Ullman (1974), Theorem 10.14, p399

[29] Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), Theorem 13.15, p.351

[30]

[31]

[32] Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), Corollary p.353

[33]

[34]

[35] J. Hartmanis, P. L. Lewis II, and R. E. Stearns. Hierarchies of memory-limited computations. _Proceedings of the 6th Annual IEEE Symposium on Switching Circuit Theory and Logic Design_, pp. 179–190. 1965.

[36]

[37] A finite language shouldn't be confused with a (usually infinite) language generated by a finite automaton.

[38]

[39]

[40] Flajolet & Sedgweick, section V.3.1, equation (13).

[41]

[42] http://cs.stackexchange.com/a/11333/683 Proof of theorem for arbitrary DFAs

[43]

[44] Flajolet & Sedgewick (2002) Theorem V.3

[45]

[46]

[47] Berstel & Reutenauer (2011) p.222

[48]  in two volumes "A" (1974, ) and "B" (1976, ), the latter with two chapters by Bret Tilson.

[49]

[50] Berstel & Reutenauer (2011) p.47

[51]