Sierpinski_triangle.svg Random_Sierpinski_Triangle_animation.gif Multigrade_operator_AND.svg of lexicographically ordered arguments. The columns interpreted as binary numbers give 1, 3, 5, 15, 17, 51... ]] The SIERPINSKI TRIANGLE (also with the original orthography _Sierpiński_), also called the SIERPINSKI GASKET or SIERPINSKI SIEVE, is a fractal and attractive fixed set with the overall shape of an equilateral triangle, subdivided recursively into smaller equilateral triangles. Originally constructed as a curve, this is one of the basic examples of self-similar sets–that is, it is a mathematically generated pattern that is reproducible at any magnification or reduction. It is named after the Polish mathematician Wacław Sierpiński, but appeared as a decorative pattern many centuries before the work of Sierpiński.[1][2]


Constructions

There are many different ways of constructing the Sierpinski triangle.

Removing triangles

Sierpinski_triangle_evolution.svg The Sierpinski triangle may be constructed from an equilateral triangle by repeated removal of triangular subsets:

1.  Start with an equilateral triangle.
2.  Subdivide it into four smaller congruent equilateral triangles and remove the central triangle.
3.  Repeat step 2 with each of the remaining smaller triangles infinitely.

Each removed triangle (a _trema_) is topologically an open set.[3] This process of recursively removing triangles is an example of a finite subdivision rule.

Shrinking and duplication

The same sequence of shapes, converging to the Sierpinski triangle, can alternatively be generated by the following steps:

1.  Start with any triangle in a plane (any closed, bounded region in the plane will actually work). The canonical Sierpinski triangle uses an equilateral triangle with a base parallel to the horizontal axis (first image).
2.  Shrink the triangle to height and width, make three copies, and position the three shrunken triangles so that each triangle touches the two other triangles at a corner (image 2). Note the emergence of the central hole—because the three shrunken triangles can between them cover only of the area of the original. (Holes are an important feature of Sierpinski's triangle.)
3.  Repeat step 2 with each of the smaller triangles (image 3 and so on).

Note that this infinite process is not dependent upon the starting shape being a triangle—it is just clearer that way. The first few steps starting, for example, from a square also tend towards a Sierpinski triangle. Michael Barnsley used an image of a fish to illustrate this in his paper "V-variable fractals and superfractals."[4][5]

Sierpinski_triangle_evolution_square.svg The actual fractal is what would be obtained after an infinite number of iterations. More formally, one describes it in terms of functions on closed sets of points. If we let _d__(A) denote the dilation by a factor of about a point A, then the Sierpinski triangle with corners A, B, and C is the fixed set of the transformation _d__(A) ∪ _d__(B) ∪ _d__(C).

This is an attractive fixed set, so that when the operation is applied to any other set repeatedly, the images converge on the Sierpinski triangle. This is what is happening with the triangle above, but any other set would suffice.

Chaos game

Triângulo_de_Sierpinski.gif If one takes a point and applies each of the transformations _d__(A), _d__(B), and _d__(C) to it randomly, the resulting points will be dense in the Sierpinski triangle, so the following algorithm will again generate arbitrarily close approximations to it:[6]

Start by labeling P₁, P₂ and P₃ as the corners of the Sierpinski triangle, and a random point V₁. Set , where _r_(n)_ is a random number 1, 2 or 3. Draw the points V₁ to V_(∞). If the first point V₁ was a point on the Sierpiński triangle, then all the points V_(_n_) lie on the Sierpinski triangle. If the first point V₁ to lie within the perimeter of the triangle is not a point on the Sierpinski triangle, none of the points V_(_n_) will lie on the Sierpinski triangle, however they will converge on the triangle. If V₁ is outside the triangle, the only way V_(_n_) will land on the actual triangle, is if V_(_n_) is on what would be part of the triangle, if the triangle was infinitely large.

Animated_construction_of_Sierpinski_Triangle.gif Fractal_tree.gif Or more simply:

1.  Take three points in a plane to form a triangle, you need not draw it.
2.  Randomly select any point inside the triangle and consider that your current position.
3.  Randomly select any one of the three vertex points.
4.  Move half the distance from your current position to the selected vertex.
5.  Plot the current position.
6.  Repeat from step 3.

This method is also called the chaos game, and is an example of an iterated function system. You can start from any point outside or inside the triangle, and it would eventually form the Sierpinski Gasket with a few leftover points (if the starting point lies on the outline of the triangle, there are no leftover points). With pencil and paper, a brief outline is formed after placing approximately one hundred points, and detail begins to appear after a few hundred. An interactive version of the chaos game can be found here.

Sierpinski1.png

Arrowhead construction of Sierpinski gasket

Arrowhead_curve_1_through_6.png Another construction for the Sierpinski gasket shows that it can be constructed as a curve in the plane. It is formed by a process of repeated modification of simpler curves, analogous to the construction of the Koch snowflake:

1.  Start with a single line segment in the plane
2.  Repeatedly replace each line segment of the curve with three shorter segments, forming 120° angles at each junction between two consecutive segments, with the first and last segments of the curve either parallel to the original line segment or forming a 60° angle with it.

At every iteration, this construction gives a continuous curve. In the limit, these approach a curve that traces out the Sierpenski triangle by a single continuous directed (infinitely wiggly) path, which is called the Sierpinski arrowhead.[7] In fact, the aim of the original article by Sierpinski of 1915, was to show an example of a curve (a Cantorian curve), as the title of the article itself declares.[8][9]

Cellular automata

The Sierpinski triangle also appears in certain cellular automata (such as Rule 90), including those relating to Conway's Game of Life. For instance, the Life-like cellular automaton B1/S12 when applied to a single cell will generate four approximations of the Sierpinski triangle.[10] A very long one cell thick line in standard life will create two mirrored Sierpinski triangles. The time-space diagram of a replicator pattern in a cellular automaton also often resembles a Sierpinski triangle, such as that of the common replicator in HighLife.[11] The Sierpinski triangle can also be found in the Ulam-Warburton automaton and the Hex-Ulam-Warburton automaton.[12]

Pascal's triangle

Sierpinski_Pascal_triangle.svg If one takes Pascal's triangle with 2^(_n_) rows and colors the even numbers white, and the odd numbers black, the result is an approximation to the Sierpinski triangle. More precisely, the limit as _n_ approaches infinity of this parity-colored 2^(_n_)-row Pascal triangle is the Sierpinski triangle.[13]

Towers of Hanoi

The Towers of Hanoi puzzle involves moving disks of different sizes between three pegs, maintaining the property that no disk is ever placed on top of a smaller disk. The states of an _n_-disk puzzle, and the allowable moves from one state to another, form an undirected graph, the Hanoi graph, that can be represented geometrically as the intersection graph of the set of triangles remaining after the _n_th step in the construction of the Sierpinski triangle. Thus, in the limit as _n_ goes to infinity, this sequence of graphs can be interpreted as a discrete analogue of the Sierpinski triangle.[14]


Properties

For integer number of dimensions _d_, when doubling a side of an object, 2^(_d_) copies of it are created, i.e. 2 copies for 1-dimensional object, 4 copies for 2-dimensional object and 8 copies for 3-dimensional object. For the Sierpinski triangle, doubling its side creates 3 copies of itself. Thus the Sierpinski triangle has Hausdorff dimension  = log₂ 3 ≈ 1.585, which follows from solving 2^(_d_) = 3 for _d_.[15]

The area of a Sierpinski triangle is zero (in Lebesgue measure). The area remaining after each iteration is of the area from the previous iteration, and an infinite number of iterations results in an area approaching zero.[16]

The points of a Sierpinski triangle have a simple characterization in barycentric coordinates.[17] If a point has coordinates (0._u_₁_u_₂_u_₃…, 0._v_₁_v_₂_v_₃…, 0._w_₁_w_₂_w_₃…), expressed as binary numerals, then the point is in Sierpinski's triangle if and only if for all _i_.


Generalization to other moduli

A generalization of the Sierpinski triangle can also be generated using Pascal's triangle if a different Modulo is used. Iteration _n_ can be generated by taking a Pascal's triangle with _P_^(_n_) rows and coloring numbers by their value for _x_ mod _P_. As _n_ approaches infinity, a fractal is generated.

The same fractal can be achieved by dividing a triangle into a tessellation of _P_² similar triangles and removing the triangles that are upside-down from the original, then iterating this step with each smaller triangle.

Conversely, the fractal can also be generated by beginning with a triangle and duplicating it and arranging of the new figures in the same orientation into a larger similar triangle with the vertices of the previous figures touching, then iterating that step.[18]


Analogues in higher dimensions

Sierpinski_pyramid.png Sierpinskitetrahedron.gif Sierpiński_Pyramid_from_Above.PNG The SIERPINSKI TETRAHEDRON or TETRIX is the three-dimensional analogue of the Sierpinski triangle, formed by repeatedly shrinking a regular tetrahedron to one half its original height, putting together four copies of this tetrahedron with corners touching, and then repeating the process.

A tetrix constructed from an initial tetrahedron of side-length _L_ has the property that the total surface area remains constant with each iteration. The initial surface area of the (iteration-0) tetrahedron of side-length _L_ is _L_². The next iteration consists of four copies with side length , so the total area is 4()² = 4_L_²· = _L_² again. Meanwhile the volume of the construction is halved at every step and therefore approaches zero. The limit of this process has neither volume nor surface but, like the Sierpinski gasket, is an intricately connected curve. Its Hausdorff dimension is  = 2. If all points are projected onto a plane that is parallel to two of the outer edges, they exactly fill a square of side length without overlap.

tetrix_projection_fill_plane.gif

Numerical generation

A short code in the Mathematica internal language: the recursive procedure SIPYRAMID generates a 3D pyramid of arbitrary order _n_ as the displayable graphic object GRAPHICS3D:

    vect[1] = {0, 0, 0};
    vect[2] = {1, 0, 0};
    vect[3] = {0.5, 3^0.5/2, 0};
    vect[4] = {0.5, 1/3*3^0.5/2, ((3^0.5/2)^2 - (1/3*3^0.5/2)^2)^0.5};
    Tetron[{i_, j_, k_}] :=
     Tetrahedron[{vect[1] + {i, j, k}, vect[2] + {i, j, k}, vect[3] + {i, j, k}, vect[4] + {i, j, k}}];
    SiPyramid[0, {i_, j_, k_}] := {Tetron[{i, j, k}]};
    SiPyramid[n_, {i_, j_, k_}] :=
      Module[{s = {}},
       Do[s = Union[s,
          SiPyramid[n - 1, 2^(n - 1)*vect[u] + {i, j, k}]], {u, 4}]; s];

Sierpinski_tetrahedrons.stl of level 0 to 6 tetrices]]


History

Wacław Sierpiński described the Sierpinski triangle in 1915. However, similar patterns appear already in the 13th-century Cosmati mosaics in the cathedral of Anagni, Italy,[19] and other places of central Italy, for carpets in many places such as the nave of the Roman Basilica of Santa Maria in Cosmedin,[20] and for isolated triangles positioned in rotae in several churches and basilicas.[21][22] In the case of the isolated triangle, the iteration is at least of three levels.

A medieval triangle, with historically certain dating[23] has been studied recently. It is in porphiry and golden leaf, isolated, level 4 iteration

The Apollonian gasket was first described by Apollonius of Perga (3rd century BC) and further analyzed by Gottfried Leibniz (17th century), and is a curved precursor of the 20th-century Sierpiński triangle.[24]


Etymology

The usage of the word "gasket" to refer to the Sierpinski triangle refers to gaskets such as are found in motors, and which sometimes feature a series of holes of decreasing size, similar to the fractal; this usage was coined by Benoit Mandelbrot, who thought the fractal looked similar to "the part that prevents leaks in motors".[25]


See also

-   Apollonian gasket, a set of mutually tangent circles with the same combinatorial structure as the Sierpinski triangle
-   List of fractals by Hausdorff dimension
-   Sierpinski carpet, another fractal named after Sierpinski and formed by repeatedly removing squares from a larger square
-   Triforce, a relic in the Legend of Zelda series


References


External links

-   -   -   -   Sierpinski Gasket by Trema Removal at cut-the-knot
-   Sierpinski Gasket and Tower of Hanoi at cut-the-knot
-   Real-time GPU generated Sierpinski Triangle in 3D
-   Pythagorean triangles, Waclaw Sierpinski, Courier Corporation, 2003

Category:Factorial and binomial topics Category:Curves Category:Topological spaces Category:Triangles Category:Cellular automaton patterns Category:Science and technology in Poland Category:L-systems

[1]

[2]

[3] "Sierpinski Gasket by Trema Removal"

[4]

[5] NOVA (public television program). The Strange New Science of Chaos (episode). Public television station WGBH Boston. Aired 31 January 1989.

[6] .

[7] .

[8]

[9]

[10] .

[11] .

[12] Tanya Khovanova, Eric Nie, Alok Puranik, The Pioneering Role of the Sierpinski Gasket. Math Horizons, 23(1), 5–9 (2015), arXiv:1408.5937

[13] .

[14] .

[15]

[16] .

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20] "Geometric floor mosaic (Sierpinski triangles), nave of Santa Maria in Cosmedin, Forum Boarium, Rome", 5 September 2011, Flickr

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]