In mathematics, specifically in ring theory, the SIMPLE MODULES over a ring _R_ are the (left or right) modules over _R_ that are not zero and have no non-zero proper submodules. Equivalently, a module _M_ is simple if and only if every cyclic submodule generated by a non-zero element of _M_ equals _M_. Simple modules form building blocks for the modules of finite length, and they are analogous to the simple groups in group theory.

In this article, all modules will be assumed to be right unital modules over a ring _R_.


Examples

Z-modules are the same as abelian groups, so a simple Z-module is an abelian group which has no non-zero proper subgroups. These are the cyclic groups of prime order.

If _I_ is a right ideal of _R_, then _I_ is simple as a right module if and only if _I_ is a minimal non-zero right ideal: If _M_ is a non-zero proper submodule of _I_, then it is also a right ideal, so _I_ is not minimal. Conversely, if _I_ is not minimal, then there is a non-zero right ideal _J_ properly contained in _I_. _J_ is a right submodule of _I_, so _I_ is not simple.

If _I_ is a right ideal of _R_, then _R_/_I_ is simple if and only if _I_ is a maximal right ideal: If _M_ is a non-zero proper submodule of _R_/_I_, then the preimage of _M_ under the quotient map is a right ideal which is not equal to _R_ and which properly contains _I_. Therefore, _I_ is not maximal. Conversely, if _I_ is not maximal, then there is a right ideal _J_ properly containing _I_. The quotient map has a non-zero kernel which is not equal to , and therefore is not simple.

Every simple _R_-module is isomorphic to a quotient _R_/_m_ where _m_ is a maximal right ideal of _R_.[1] By the above paragraph, any quotient _R_/_m_ is a simple module. Conversely, suppose that _M_ is a simple _R_-module. Then, for any non-zero element _x_ of _M_, the cyclic submodule _xR_ must equal _M_. Fix such an _x_. The statement that _xR_ = _M_ is equivalent to the surjectivity of the homomorphism that sends _r_ to _xr_. The kernel of this homomorphism is a right ideal _I_ of _R_, and a standard theorem states that _M_ is isomorphic to _R_/_I_. By the above paragraph, we find that _I_ is a maximal right ideal. Therefore, _M_ is isomorphic to a quotient of _R_ by a maximal right ideal.

If _k_ is a field and _G_ is a group, then a group representation of _G_ is a left module over the group ring _k[G]_ (for details, see the main page on this relationship).[2] The simple _k[G]_ modules are also known as IRREDUCIBLE representations. A major aim of representation theory is to understand the irreducible representations of groups.


Basic properties of simple modules

The simple modules are precisely the modules of length 1; this is a reformulation of the definition.

Every simple module is indecomposable, but the converse is in general not true.

Every simple module is cyclic, that is it is generated by one element.

Not every module has a simple submodule; consider for instance the Z-module Z in light of the first example above.

Let _M_ and _N_ be (left or right) modules over the same ring, and let _f_ : _M_ → _N_ be a module homomorphism. If _M_ is simple, then _f_ is either the zero homomorphism or injective because the kernel of _f_ is a submodule of _M_. If _N_ is simple, then _f_ is either the zero homomorphism or surjective because the image of _f_ is a submodule of _N_. If _M_ = _N_, then _f_ is an endomorphism of _M_, and if _M_ is simple, then the prior two statements imply that _f_ is either the zero homomorphism or an isomorphism. Consequently, the endomorphism ring of any simple module is a division ring. This result is known as SCHUR'S LEMMA.

The converse of Schur's lemma is not true in general. For example, the Z-module Q is not simple, but its endomorphism ring is isomorphic to the field Q.


Simple modules and composition series

If _M_ is a module which has a non-zero proper submodule _N_, then there is a short exact sequence

0 → _N_ → _M_ → _M_/_N_ → 0.
A common approach to proving a fact about _M_ is to show that the fact is true for the center term of a short exact sequence when it is true for the left and right terms, then to prove the fact for _N_ and _M_/_N_. If _N_ has a non-zero proper submodule, then this process can be repeated. This produces a chain of submodules

⋯ ⊂ _M_₂ ⊂ _M_₁ ⊂ _M_.
In order to prove the fact this way, one needs conditions on this sequence and on the modules _M__(_i_)/_M__(_i_\ +\ 1). One particularly useful condition is that the length of the sequence is finite and each quotient module _M__(_i_)/_M__(_i_\ +\ 1) is simple. In this case the sequence is called a COMPOSITION SERIES for _M_. In order to prove a statement inductively using composition series, the statement is first proved for simple modules, which form the base case of the induction, and then the statement is proved to remain true under an extension of a module by a simple module. For example, the Fitting lemma shows that the endomorphism ring of a finite length indecomposable module is a local ring, so that the strong Krull-Schmidt theorem holds and the category of finite length modules is a Krull-Schmidt category.

The Jordan–Hölder theorem and the Schreier refinement theorem describe the relationships amongst all composition series of a single module. The Grothendieck group ignores the order in a composition series and views every finite length module as a formal sum of simple modules. Over semisimple rings, this is no loss as every module is a semisimple module and so a direct sum of simple modules. Ordinary character theory provides better arithmetic control, and uses simple C_G_ modules to understand the structure of finite groups _G_. Modular representation theory uses Brauer characters to view modules as formal sums of simple modules, but is also interested in how those simple modules are joined together within composition series. This is formalized by studying the Ext functor and describing the module category in various ways including quivers (whose nodes are the simple modules and whose edges are composition series of non-semisimple modules of length 2) and Auslander–Reiten theory where the associated graph has a vertex for every indecomposable module.


The Jacobson density theorem

An important advance in the theory of simple modules was the Jacobson density theorem. The Jacobson density theorem states:

    Let U be a simple right R-module and write D = End_(R)(U). Let A be any D-linear operator on U and let X be a finite D-linearly independent subset of U. Then there exists an element r of R such that x·A = x·r for all x in X.[3]

In particular, any primitive ring may be viewed as (that is, isomorphic to) a ring of _D_-linear operators on some _D_-space.

A consequence of the Jacobson density theorem is Wedderburn's theorem; namely that any right artinian simple ring is isomorphic to a full matrix ring of _n_ by _n_ matrices over a division ring for some _n_. This can also be established as a corollary of the Artin–Wedderburn theorem.


See also

-   Semisimple modules are modules that can be written as a sum of simple submodules
-   Irreducible ideal
-   Irreducible representation


References

Category:Module theory Category:Representation theory

[1] Herstein, _Non-commutative Ring Theory_, Lemma 1.1.3

[2]

[3] Isaacs, Theorem 13.14, p. 185