In group theory, a branch of mathematics, given a group _G_ under a binary operation ∗, a subset _H_ of _G_ is called a SUBGROUP of _G_ if _H_ also forms a group under the operation ∗. More precisely, _H_ is a subgroup of _G_ if the restriction of ∗ to is a group operation on _H_. This is usually denoted , read as "_H_ is a subgroup of _G_".

The TRIVIAL SUBGROUP of any group is the subgroup {_e_} consisting of just the identity element.

A PROPER SUBGROUP of a group _G_ is a subgroup _H_ which is a proper subset of _G_ (i. e. ). This is usually represented notationally by , read as "_H_ is a proper subgroup of _G_". Some authors also exclude the trivial group from being proper (i. e. ).[1][2]

If _H_ is a subgroup of _G_, then _G_ is sometimes called an OVERGROUP of _H_.

The same definitions apply more generally when _G_ is an arbitrary semigroup, but this article will only deal with subgroups of groups. The group _G_ is sometimes denoted by the ordered pair , usually to emphasize the operation ∗ when _G_ carries multiple algebraic or other structures.

This article will write _ab_ for , as is usual.


Basic properties of subgroups

-   A subset _H_ of the group _G_ is a subgroup of _G_ if and only if it is nonempty and closed under products and inverses. (The closure conditions mean the following: whenever _a_ and _b_ are in _H_, then _ab_ and _a_^(−1) are also in _H_. These two conditions can be combined into one equivalent condition: whenever _a_ and _b_ are in _H_, then _ab_^(−1) is also in _H_.) In the case that _H_ is finite, then _H_ is a subgroup if and only if _H_ is closed under products. (In this case, every element _a_ of _H_ generates a finite cyclic subgroup of _H_, and the inverse of _a_ is then _a_^(−1) = _a_^(_n_−1), where _n_ is the order of _a_.)
-   The above condition can be stated in terms of a homomorphism; that is, _H_ is a subgroup of a group _G_ if and only if _H_ is a subset of _G_ and there is an inclusion homomorphism (i. e., i(_a_) = _a_ for every _a_) from _H_ to _G_.
-   The identity of a subgroup is the identity of the group: if _G_ is a group with identity _e__(_G_), and _H_ is a subgroup of _G_ with identity _e__(_H_), then _e__(_H_) = _e__(_G_).
-   The inverse of an element in a subgroup is the inverse of the element in the group: if _H_ is a subgroup of a group _G_, and _a_ and _b_ are elements of _H_ such that _ab_ = _ba_ = _e__(_H_), then _ab_ = _ba_ = _e__(_G_).
-   The intersection of subgroups _A_ and _B_ is again a subgroup.[3] The union of subgroups _A_ and _B_ is a subgroup if and only if either _A_ or _B_ contains the other, since for example 2 and 3 are in the union of 2Z and 3Z but their sum 5 is not. Another example is the union of the x-axis and the y-axis in the plane (with the addition operation); each of these objects is a subgroup but their union is not. This also serves as an example of two subgroups, whose intersection is precisely the identity.
-   If _S_ is a subset of _G_, then there exists a minimum subgroup containing _S_, which can be found by taking the intersection of all of subgroups containing _S_; it is denoted by and is said to be the subgroup generated by _S_. An element of _G_ is in if and only if it is a finite product of elements of _S_ and their inverses.
-   Every element _a_ of a group _G_ generates the cyclic subgroup . If is isomorphic to Z/_n_Z for some positive integer _n_, then _n_ is the smallest positive integer for which _a_^(_n_) = _e_, and _n_ is called the _order_ of _a_. If is isomorphic to Z, then _a_ is said to have _infinite order_.
-   The subgroups of any given group form a complete lattice under inclusion, called the lattice of subgroups. (While the infimum here is the usual set-theoretic intersection, the supremum of a set of subgroups is the subgroup _generated by_ the set-theoretic union of the subgroups, not the set-theoretic union itself.) If _e_ is the identity of _G_, then the trivial group {_e_} is the minimum subgroup of _G_, while the maximum subgroup is the group _G_ itself.

under addition. The subgroup H contains only 0 and 4, and is isomorphic to ℤ/2ℤ. There are four left cosets of H: H itself, 1+H, 2+H, and 3+H (written using additive notation since this is an additive group). Together they partition the entire group G into equal-size, non-overlapping sets. The index [G : H] is 4.]]


Cosets and Lagrange's theorem

Given a subgroup _H_ and some _a_ in G, we define the LEFT COSET _aH_ = {_ah_ : _h_ in _H_}. Because _a_ is invertible, the map φ : _H_ → _aH_ given by φ(_h_) = _ah_ is a bijection. Furthermore, every element of _G_ is contained in precisely one left coset of _H_; the left cosets are the equivalence classes corresponding to the equivalence relation _a_₁ ~ _a_₂ if and only if _a_₁^(−1)_a_₂ is in _H_. The number of left cosets of _H_ is called the index of _H_ in _G_ and is denoted by [_G_ : _H_].

Lagrange's theorem states that for a finite group _G_ and a subgroup _H_,

$$[ G : H ] = { |G| \over |H| }$$
where |_G_| and |_H_| denote the orders of _G_ and _H_, respectively. In particular, the order of every subgroup of _G_ (and the order of every element of _G_) must be a divisor of |_G_|.[4][5]

RIGHT COSETS are defined analogously: _Ha_ = {_ha_ : _h_ in _H_}. They are also the equivalence classes for a suitable equivalence relation and their number is equal to [_G_ : _H_].

If _aH_ = _Ha_ for every _a_ in _G_, then _H_ is said to be a normal subgroup. Every subgroup of index 2 is normal: the left cosets, and also the right cosets, are simply the subgroup and its complement. More generally, if _p_ is the lowest prime dividing the order of a finite group _G,_ then any subgroup of index _p_ (if such exists) is normal.


Example: Subgroups of Z₈

Let _G_ be the cyclic group Z₈ whose elements are

_G_ = {0,2,4,6,1,3,5,7}
and whose group operation is addition modulo eight. Its Cayley table is

  +   0   2   4   6   1   3   5   7
  --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
  0   0   2   4   6   1   3   5   7
  2   2   4   6   0   3   5   7   1
  4   4   6   0   2   5   7   1   3
  6   6   0   2   4   7   1   3   5
  1   1   3   5   7   2   4   6   0
  3   3   5   7   1   4   6   0   2
  5   5   7   1   3   6   0   2   4
  7   7   1   3   5   0   2   4   6

This group has two nontrivial subgroups: _J_={0,4} and _H_={0,2,4,6}, where _J_ is also a subgroup of _H_. The Cayley table for _H_ is the top-left quadrant of the Cayley table for _G_. The group _G_ is cyclic, and so are its subgroups. In general, subgroups of cyclic groups are also cyclic.


Example: Subgroups of S₄(the symmetric group on 4 elements)

Every group has as many small subgroups as neutral elements on the main diagonal:

The trivial group and two-element groups Z₂. These small subgroups are not counted in the following list.

  --------------------------------------------- ------------------ --------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- ----------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------- ----------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
  S₄ showing all permutations of 4 elements]]   {{multiple image   align = right   image1 = Symmetric group S4; lattice of subgroups Hasse diagram; all 30 subgroups.svg   width1 = 250   caption1 = All 30 subgroups   image2 = Symmetric group S4; lattice of subgroups Hasse diagram; 11 different cycle graphs.svg   width2 = 185   caption2 = Simplified   footer = Hasse diagrams of the lattice of subgroups of S₄ }}
  --------------------------------------------- ------------------ --------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- ----------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------- ----------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------

12 elements

A₄ showing only the even permutations
Subgroups:
]]

8 elements

+------------+---+----+---+----+
| of order 8 |   | ]] |   | ]] |
| Subgroups: |   |    |   |    |
| ]]         |   |    |   |    |
+------------+---+----+---+----+

6 elements

+-------------+----+----+----+
| S₃          | ]] | ]] | ]] |
| Subgroup:]] |    |    |    |
+-------------+----+----+----+

4 elements

  ---- -- -- --
  ]]
  ---- -- -- --

  ------ -- --
  Z₄]]
  ------ -- --

3 elements

  ------ -- -- --
  Z₃]]
  ------ -- -- --


Other examples

-   The even integers are a subgroup of the additive group of integers: when you add two even numbers, you get an even number.
-   An ideal in a ring R is a subgroup of the additive group of R.
-   A linear subspace of a vector space is a subgroup of the additive group of vectors.
-   Let A be an abelian group; the elements of A that have finite period form a subgroup of A called the torsion subgroup of A.


See also

-   Cartan subgroup
-   Fitting subgroup
-   Stable subgroup
-   Fixed-point subgroup
-   Subgroup test


Notes


References

-   .

-   .

-   .

-

Category:Group theory Category:Subgroup properties

[1] Hungerford (1974), p. 32

[2] Artin (2011), p. 43

[3] Jacobson (2009), p. 41

[4] See a didactic proof in this video.

[5]