TIZIANA ANNUNZIATA CANTONE, name subsequently legally changed to "TIZIANA GIGLIO" (July 15, 1983, Casalnuovo di Napoli, Italy – September 13, 2016, Mugnano di Napoli), was an Italian woman who committed suicide after being victim of revenge porn by her ex-boyfriend.

In a bid to make her ex-boyfriend jealous, she sent videos of herself engaging in consensual sex acts with a new boyfriend to several people, including her ex-boyfriend, via the WhatsApp messaging service. Her ex-boyfriend subsequently uploaded the videos to public internet sites in early 2015. One such video went viral due to her reaction with the words "You're filming? Good!". (Italian: _Stai facendo un video? Bravo!_) when being filmed performing fellatio in front of a car. The phrase appeared on t-shirts, smartphone cases and other paraphernalia.[1]

She fought a legal case over the right to be forgotten, which led to the videos being removed from numerous EU websites. However, she was also ordered to pay 20,000 euros in legal costs. She legally changed her name and moved to a new city in attempts to avoid the publicity generated by the videos.[2] She hanged herself on 13 September 2016.[3][4][5][6]

Her mother Maria Teresa Giglio still fights to remove the video from the Internet.[7]


Seeing also

-   Bullying
-   Cyberbullying
-   Revenge Porn


References

Category:1983 births Category:2016 deaths Category:People from Naples Category:Suicides by hanging in Italy Category:Violence against women in Italy Category:Victims of cyberbullying

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7] _A Mother Wants the Internet to Forget Italy's Most Viral Sex Tape_, Rossalyn Warren, May 16, 2018, The Atlantic.