The TK-80 (Training Kit μCOM-80) was an 8080-based single-board computer kit developed by Nippon Electric Company (NEC) in 1976. It was originally developed for engineers who considered using the _μCOM-80 family_ in their product. It was successful among hobbyists in late 1970s in Japan, due to its reasonable price and an expensive computer terminal not being required.


History

In February 1976, NEC formed the Microcomputer Sales section in the Integrated Circuit division, and began to provide development environments for their microprocessors. However, they visited customers and explained, but it was difficult for them to understand how to use a microprocessor. At the same time, NEC received an order from a laboratory in the Yokosuka Communication Institute of NTT that they wanted an educational microcomputer product for their new employees. , a member of the section, proposed to his manager developing an educational kit.[1][2]

Goto mainly designed the TK-80, and did the detailed design work.[3] Goto got an idea from a photo of the KIM-1. The KIM-1 can monitor and show the current address by the software, but the display disappers when the CPU is hanging. The TK-80 has the Dynamic Display using the 555 timer IC and interrupt the CPU, it can always show the current address. In addition, the TK-80 has a CMOS battery. He decided to document its manual with a circuit diagram and assembly code of the debug monitor, influenced by the PDP-8 which was an open architecture.[4] TK-80_demonstrated_at_Bit-INN.jpg at _Bit-INN_[5]]] TK-80_advert_Sep_1976.jpg The TK-80 came out on August 3, 1976. It was priced at 88,500 yen, an engineer's section manager could approve at that time. NEC had opened a support center (_Bit-INN_) at the Akihabara Radio Kaikan on September 13, 1976. They found many machines were sold to not only electrical engineers but also businessmen, hobbyists and students. The TK-80 was sold more than 2000 units per month, despite 200 units expected.[6]

Soon after its success, other Japanese microprocessor manufacturers developed an evaluation kit for their microprocessor. Power supplies and other peripherals came out from third parties. Watanabe and his members wrote an introductory book in July 1977, it became very popular and sold more than 200,000 copies.[7] Also, some computer magazines were founded, the _ASCII_, the _I/O_, the and the _RAM_.

In Japan, the Altair 8800 was sold in 1975, but not successful due to its high brokerage fee. Neither the Apple II nor the Commodore PET.[8] Single-board computers had been popular until the successor PC-8001 came out in 1979.


Variants

The TK-80E was a cost-reduced version priced at 67,000 yen, introduced in December 1977.[9] It contained the NEC μPD8080AF (2 MHz), fully compatible with the Intel 8080A. (Original Intel 8080A has a bug in the BCD adjustment. The μPD8080A doesn't.). Other specifications included 768 B (Max. Up to 1 KB expandable) of ROM, and 512 B (Max. Up to 1 KB expandable) of RAM.

The TK-80BS was introduced in December 1977. It included a keyboard, a backplane and an expansion board for the TK-80 with 5KB RAM and 12KB ROM. It supported 8K BASIC.

The COMPO BS/80 was a fully assembled unit of the TK-80BS, introduced in 1978.[10] It was not a success because of its poor built-in BASIC and slow clock speed.[11]

The TK-85 was introduced in May 1980 and was the successor to the TK-80E. It contained the μPD8085AC processor (2.4576 MHz) and has a system configuration that is considered to some extent for compatibility with the TK-80. Other specifications included 2 KB (Max. Up to 8 KB expandable) of ROM, 1 KB of RAM, while the board size was 310 × 220 mm. It supported BASIC.


Literature

-   -


References


External links

-   -   -   (Japanese language)

-   (Japanese language. Photos & overview plus pages for TK-80BS & COMPO BS/80.)

-   (Japanese language. Photos for TK-80 & detailed overview for TK-80 models.)

-   (Japanese language. Photos & overview for TK-80BS (BASIC STATION).)

-   (Japanese language. Photos & overview for TK-85, and specifications comparison chart with TK-80.)

-   (Japanese language. Photos & overview for TK-85.)

Category:NEC personal computers Category:Computer-related introductions in 1976 Category:Early microcomputers

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]