-AllPdCl-2.png]] TRANSITION-METAL ALLYL COMPLEXES are coordination complexes with allyl and its derivatives as ligands. Allyl is the radical with the connectivity CH₂CHCH₂, although as a ligand it is usually viewed as an allyl anion CH₂=CH−CH₂^(−), which is usually described as two equivalent resonance structures.


Examples and their syntheses

The allyl ligand is commonly in organometallic chemistry. Most commonly, allyl ligands bind to metals via all three carbon centers, the η³-binding mode. An example of a homoleptic allyl complex is Ir(η³-allyl)₃.[1] Mixed ligand allyl complexes are more common. Examples include (η³-allyl)Mn(CO)₄ and CpPd(allyl).

Allyl complexes are usually generated by oxidative addition of allylic halides to low-valent metal complexes. This route is used to prepare (allyl)₂Ni₂Cl₂:[2][3]

    2 Ni(CO)₄ + 2 ClCH₂CH=CH₂ → Ni₂(μ-Cl)₂(η³-C₃H₅)₂ + 8 CO


Sigma-allyl

Some complexes with η¹-allyl ligands are also known, e.g., CpFe(CO)₂(η¹-allyl) where only the methylene group is attached to the Fe centre. Such compounds often convert to the η³-allyl derivatives by dissociation of a ligand:

    CpFe(CO)₂(η¹-allyl) → CpFe(CO)(η³-allyl) + CO


Benzyl complexes

Benzyl and allyl ligands often exhibit similar chemical properties. Benzyl favors the η¹ bonding mode.[4]


Applications

In terms of applications, a popular allyl complex is allyl palladium chloride.[5] Allyl ligands are susceptible to nucleophilic addition, which can be useful in organic synthesis.[6]


References

Category:Organometallic chemistry Category:Transition metals Category:Allyl complexes Category:Coordination chemistry

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] Tatsuno, Y.; Yoshida, T.; Otsuka, S. "(η³-allyl)palladium(II) Complexes" Inorganic Syntheses, 1990, volume 28, pages 342-345.

[6] Hartwig, J. F. Organotransition Metal Chemistry, from Bonding to Catalysis; University Science Books: New York, 2010.