TS15 (Tityustoxin-15; α-KTx 21.1) is produced by the Brazilian yellow scorpion _Tityus serrulatus_. It targets voltage-gated potassium channels, primarily the subtypes Kv1.2 and Kv1.3.


Sources

Ts15 can be isolated from the venom of _Tityus serrulatus_, otherwise known as the Brazilian yellow scorpion.[1] It is the deadliest scorpion toxin in Brazil, with a lethality rate of 0.15%. Ts15 is only one of many neurotoxins that can be found in the venom of _Tityus serrulatus_.[2]


Chemistry

Ts15 is a peptide with a length of 36 amino acids, which are crosslinked by three disulfide bridges.[3] The 27th position in the amino acid sequence undergoes N-linked glycosylation.[4] Ts15 is a scorpion short toxin. The rest of the structure of the toxin remains unknown so far. Due to its low structural similarity to other members of the α-family (<30%), it cannot be easily compared to them.[5]


Target

Kv channels are the main targets of Ts15. While other members of the α-family generally target both Kv channels and sodium channels (Nav channels), Ts15 only targets Kv channels.[6] It mainly targets Kv1.2 and Kv1.3: it blocks the channel's current by 73% and 50% respectively. When all targeted channels are compared, Ts15 has the highest affinity for Kv1.2 channels. Besides these channels, Ts15 also targets Shaker IR channels, Kv1.6 channels [7] and the Kv2.1 channels.[8] The effects of Ts15 are voltage-independent, meaning it can bind to a channel in any state of activation, and they also are reversible.


Toxicity and treatment

Toxicity

The LD₅₀ of Ts15 is unknown. The symptoms caused solely by Ts15 have not been studied extensively. However, Ts15 is known to block the Kv1.3 channels on autoreactive effector memory T-cells. The binding of the toxin triggers immunosuppression, by decreasing the calcium influx into the cell.[9]

Treatment

In general, a sting by _Tityus serrulatus_ is treated with scorpion antivenom serum, named _Soro antiscorpionico_. A human antibody fragment, _serrumab_, neutralises most of the venom. However, this antibody works on the entire venomous cocktail of the scorpion.[10] Information about treating Ts15 alone is currently unavailable.


References

Category:Neurotoxins Category:Ion channel toxins Category:Invertebrate toxins

[1] Martin-Eauclaire, M. F., Pimenta, A. M., Bougis, P. E., & De Lima, M. E. (2016). Potassium channel blockers from the venom of the Brazilian scorpion _Tityus serrulatus_. _Toxicon, 119_, 253-265.

[2] Pucca, M. B., Cerni, F. A., Junior, E. L. P., Bordon, K. D. C. F., Amorim, F. G., Cordeiro, F. A., ... & Arantes, E. C. (2015). _Tityus serrulatus_ venom – A lethal cocktail. _Toxicon, 108_, 272-284.

[3]

[4] https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P86270

[5] Cologna, C. T., Peigneur, S., Rosa, J. C., Selistre-de-Araujo, H. S., Varanda, W. A., Tytgat, J., & Arantes, E. C. (2011). Purification and characterization of Ts15, the first member of a new α-KTX subfamily from the venom of the Brazilian scorpion _Tityus serrulatus_. _Toxicon, 58_, 54-61.

[6]

[7]

[8] Pucca, M. B., Bertolini, T. B., Cerni, F. A., Bordon, K. C., Peigneur, S., Tytgat, J., ... & Arantes, E. C. (2016). Immunosuppressive evidence of _Tityus serrulatus_ toxins Ts6 and Ts15: insights of a novel K+ channel pattern in T cells. _Immunology, 147_, 240-250.

[9]

[10]